https://www.chilipeppermadness.com/recipes/how-to-make-hot-sauce/


  * Skip to primary navigation
  * Skip to main content
  * Skip to primary sidebar

  *     * Facebook
    * Instagram
    * Pinterest
    * Twitter
    * YouTube

  * About
  * Cookbooks
  * Shop
  * Search

  * Recipe Index
  * RECIPES BY TYPE
    * BBQ/Grilled
    * Burgers
    * Chicken Wings
    * Chili
    * Curry
    * Dehydrator
    * Game Day
    * Hot Sauces
    * Jalapeno Poppers
    * Marinades
    * Pickling
    * Preserving
    * Quick and Easy
    * Salsas
    * Sauces
    * Seasonings
    * Stuffed Peppers
    * Tacos
  * COOKING TIPS
  * Pepper Info
    * Chili Pepper Types
    * The Scoville Scale
    * Hottest Peppers in the World
    * Growing Chili Peppers
    * Preserving
    * Health Benefits
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * Buy Plants & Seeds

menu icon

search icon

Search

  * Recipe Index
  * All Recipes
  * Pepper Info
  * Chili Pepper Types
  * The Scoville Scale
  * Growing Chili Peppers
  * Preserving
  * Chili Pepper Health Benefits
  * Frequently Asked Questions
  * Cooking Tips
  * Cookbooks
  * Shop
  * About Us

×

Home » How to Make Hot Sauce - The Ultimate Guide

# How to Make Hot Sauce - The Ultimate Guide

by Mike Hultquist · Sep 6, 2018 · 107 Comments

  *   *   *   *   * 

_This guide will teach you how to make hot sauces of different types,
including many recipes and tips, fermenting information, preserving hot sauce,
and how to start a hot sauce business._

The popularity of hot sauce in the United States has exploded in the last
twenty years, and it shows no signs of slowing down. What used to be a market
dominated by only a few hot sauce options with interesting fringe hot sauces
is now a market filled with a wonderful selection of hot sauces for consumers.

Gone are the days of a single brand or two filling the hot sauce shelves.

As I run a food blog dedicated to spicy foods as well as chili peppers, I
receive emails and comments all the time related to making hot sauces. People
want to know how to make them at home. Some people want to learn how to take
their hot sauce making hobby and turn it into a business.

I have a lot of hot sauce recipes on the site here, but wanted to add to my
growing recipe collection some information on how to make hot sauces in
general.

I will continually update this page with information as I acquire it, but for
now, let's talk about making your own hot sauces at home. It all starts with
an essential ingredient - chili peppers.

## Chili Peppers and Hot Sauce

Chili peppers are essential to so many cuisines around the world. Often that
chili pepper flavor, spice and sometimes heat becomes synonymous with a
particular culture. Chili peppers exude charisma and a mystique that is
simultaneously exotic and down-home, and without them we wouldn't have some of
our favorite dishes and condiments, one in particular that is very close to my
heart - HOT SAUCE.

I enjoyed hot sauce as a kid, but didn't discover the wide world of artisan
hot sauces until well into my twenties. Recently married, I became interested
in cooking and my appetite for spicy food was in full bloom.

I found some outstanding hot sauces with the craziest labels, some of them
serious, some of them funny, plowing through them by the case, and quickly
became interested in making my own.

There is a bit of an art to making hot sauces, but it isn't a difficult thing
to do. It is mostly about combining chili peppers with other ingredients to
achieve a particular flavor.

## History of Hot Sauce

Chili peppers have been harvested for thousands of years, and it is known that
when Columbus landed in Haiti and the Dominican Republic in 1492, he found the
Arawak people using peppers extensively. They preserved meats with peppers and
cooked them into almost every meal.

The first advertisement for a commercial hot sauce in the United States seems
to be in Massachusetts in 1807 by a farmer for a cayenne sauce.

It was Edmund McIlhenny, a banker from New Orleans who popularized hot sauce
in the American culture. He fermented Tabasco peppers and aged them, strained
and mixed them with vinegar, and began to sell it to local markets.

McIlhenny's sauce became the famous "Tabasco" hot sauce that we know today.

## Reasons to Make Hot Sauce at Home

I started making hot sauces at home because I had fallen in love with many of
the artisan hot sauces out there, but sometimes couldn't find them, and I
wanted to experiment with different flavors.

When you make your own hot sauce at home, you are free to incorporate whatever
ingredients that please you. Also, you're free to emphasize particular flavors
that other sauces don't offer, such as more superhot chili peppers or a batch
that focuses heavily on fruit. In this way, making your own hot sauce
guarantees it will be unique.

### It's also incredibly fun and satisfying.

I enjoy spending time in the kitchen, cooking up batches of hot sauce, and it
makes me happy when I finish a new batch, freshly bottled. I set them into my
refrigerator with a sense of happiness knowing that I will have a new hot
sauce for months to come.

Making hot sauce is also a great way to preserve your chili pepper harvest. I
grow a good sized pepper garden each year and while I cook with and preserve
them in many different ways, I have yet to find a chili pepper that can't be
made into a wonderful hot sauce.

Even mild peppers can create flavorful sauces.

See How to Preserve Chili Peppers for further information.

## Types of Hot Sauces

I've never seen a definitive list of hot sauce types, as I don't think a list
of such exists, though hot sauces do vary from region to region. There are
different techniques to making hot sauces, too, but it mostly seems to be a
regional variation based on regional ingredients, which you'll see reflected
in this list.

Hot sauce has countless variations, such as the consistency of the peppers,
the preparation of the peppers (fermented, fresh, dried, roasted, pan cooked)
the actual types of peppers used in the hot sauce, the use of other
ingredients and more.

The most basic division with hot sauces is whether or not the peppers are
blended with the other ingredients. Sometimes they are, sometimes they are
not.

### Here is a list of popular hot sauce types:

**Louisiana Style** - This hot sauce, popularized by hot sauces like "Tabasco"
and "Crystal", is made with fresh or fermented peppers that are mashed with
salt and vinegar. I make a lot of hot sauces this way, with both fresh and
fermented peppers.

**Caribbean Style** - Usually made with fiery habaneros or Scotch Bonnet
peppers, these sauces vary wildly because of the diverse culinary influences
in the area. You'll find hot sauces with African influence, and others with
French influence nearby, as well as Indian influence and more. The ingredients
reflect this.

**Hawaiian Style** - Hawaiian hot sauce, or "Hawaiian Chili Pepper Water", is
typically a mixture of local chili peppers, garlic, ginger, a bit of vinegar
but mostly water, among other potential ingredients. It is splashed over
everything. It is reminiscent of the famous "Puerto Rican Hot Sauce - Pique".

**American Southwest** - You'll find many earthy ingredients with thick walled
New Mexican peppers, either fresh or dried, with very little use of vinegar.
In New Mexico in particular, they serve up "red" or "green" chili sauce all
year long.

**Mexican Style** - You'll notice a lot of crossover from Mexican cuisine and
the American Southwest and Tex-Mex cuisine. These hot sauces are made with
lots of smoked and/or dried pods as well as local ingredients. They usually
focus more on flavor and less on heat.

**Madagascar Style** - In Madagascar, the locals serve "Sakay", which means
"spicy" in Malagasy, with many of their meals. Cooks there do not commonly
cook with heat, but serve it on the side as a condiment or dipper. It is made
primarily with peppers, oil and vinegar, then adjusted with other ingredients
to taste.

**South American** - Here you'll find some interesting and flavorful hot
sauces, from Peruvian Aji Amarillo sauce to Chilean Pebre (herb and oil based
with peppers) to Molho de Pimento (peppers and vinegar), and many, many more.

**Asian Style** - Asia is a huge area with a numerous cultures, so it is
difficult to characterize their hot sauce collectively, though many Asian hot
sauces and sauces are thick and used as chili pastes or chili oils.

In Thailand, Sriracha Hot Sauce is the most famous, made primarily with ground
chilies, garlic, vinegar, sugar, and salt. In Korea, Gochujang is quite
famous, made from chili powder and fermented glutinous rice.

**Sambal** \- hugely popular in Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore - is the
generic term for local chili pepper sauces and hot sauces. They vary in heat
level and in ingredients used.

**Middle Eastern Style** - Chili peppers are popular for sauces in the Middle
East with sauces such as Harissa (a flavorful chili paste), Muhammara (a hot
pepper dip), Shatta (a chunky pepper sauce), and Zhug (an herb and oil based
sauce with peppers), with flavors of Middle Eastern spices.

**African** - the most famous African hot sauce is Peri Peri Sauce, which is
made from African Bird's Eye chili peppers. It is thick and flavorful with a
nice level of heat.

**Indian Style** - India is well known for lot of spices, and use them in
chutney and general everyday sauces and dips.

**European Style** - I've encountered Hungarian Hot Paprika as well as Ajvar
(pronounced "eye-var" - smoky roasted red peppers with sometimes eggplant),
which is a Balkan sauce. It is more like a spread. There is a very hot
version, call Lutenica (aka "Ljutenica" - "Luto" means "hot"), made with
peppers, carrots, garlic, oil, sugar, salt, tomatoes, and sometimes eggplant,
though interpretations exist from region to region.

There is also Hungarian "Eros Pista" (Strong Steve), made primarily of minced
paprika peppers and salt. Spain cooks with a lot of peppers and some of their
hot sauces include Samfaina (like a French ratatouille), Sofrito (peppers with
tomato, garlic, onions and oil) and Mojos (herb and oil based with peppers,
sometimes). Italy does have hot sauces, such as the famous Diavolo sauce, made
with spicy chili flakes or peppers.

**Superhot Style** - There is a lot of crossover between other styles of hot
sauces, but these hot sauces are always made with superhot chili peppers,
those that are 1 Million Scoville Heat Units and above, like the ghost pepper,
scorpion peppers, 7 pots and the Carolina Reaper, which is the hottest chili
pepper in the world currently.

Again, this is not an exhaustive list, as I could include different types of
sauces, chili oils and more, so for the curious minded, I suggest following
the peppers into other parts of the world and discover what the locals are
cooking.

You'll without a doubt discover some very interesting hot sauces made with
local ingredients.

## Typical Hot Sauce Ingredients

At its most basic form, hot sauce is typically a mixture of chili peppers and
some sort of liquid, such as vinegar, citrus, or even water. You can mix those
two together and you've got yourself a hot sauce. Will it be great? Maybe.
Could it be better? Of course.

When you incorporate other ingredients, you begin to develop a flavor profile,
and one sauce may work for one particular dish over another. It is the
combination of those ingredients that makes hot sauce making fun and
interesting.

**Some common ingredients for making hot sauce include:**

  * Chili peppers
  * Vinegar
  * Citrus juice - lemon, lime, orange, grapefruit, pineapple, etc.
  * Fruit
  * Vegetables
  * Seasonings
  * Salt

### The Chili Pepper Factor - Bringing the Hot Sauce Heat

### Making Hot Sauce from Fresh Peppers

There is a MASSIVE variety of chili peppers available to you for hot sauce
making, with a range in not only heat but flavor. You can mix and match
peppers as well for interesting combinations and heat levels.

Think anywhere from jalapenos to serranos to cayenne peppers to Thai peppers,
habanero peppers, superhot peppers like 7 Pots, scorpions, the Carolina Reaper
and so much more.

### Making Hot Sauce from Dried Peppers and Powders

You can also use DRIED chili peppers, either whole or as powders. Certain
dried peppers make for hugely flavorful sauces and hot sauces, particularly
Mexican varieties like anchos or pasillas. Same goes for powders, which can
turn into beautiful hot sauces.

Learn much more about how to make hot sauce from dried peppers here and how to
make hot sauce from chili powders here.

### Vinegars and Acids

Vinegar is another interesting variable. There are different types, such as
white wine vinegar, red wine vinegar, apple cider vinegar and malt vinegar.
Each has its own character and will affect the flavor of your final hot sauce,
as does your choice of citrus.

A hot sauce made with lemon juice will taste substantially different from a
hot sauce made with orange juice.

### Fruits and Vegetables

Vegetables and fruits are commonly used ingredients. Tomatoes are widely
popular for their depth and versatility, as are carrots for their surprising
sweetness and substance. Fruits add sweetness and character.

Citrus fruit is very commonly used, as is pineapple and mango, though I have
experimented with hot sauces made from kiwi, papaya, coconut and more.

### Seasonings and Salt

There is nothing more widely variable than seasonings. There are different
blends and combinations from all over the world, so you have many, many
options. A favorite of mine is to use homemade powders from peppers that I
have smoked and dehydrated.

Salt is ubiquitous. It belongs to the seasoning category, but salt is unique
in that it also acts as a preservative for your hot sauce, along with vinegar
and citrus.

With all of these ingredients, you have a near infinity of options for making
a unique hot sauce.

## Fermenting Peppers for Making Hot Sauce

Fermenting chili peppers is a popular way to make hot sauce. Fermentation is
the natural process of breaking down the peppers with micro-organisms into a
more digestible form.

If you've ever enjoyed Tabasco sauce, you've tasted fermented chili peppers.
Tabasco starts with tabasco peppers which they crush, mix with salt, and
ferment in oak barrels for up to 3 years. The original Tabasco sauce only uses
3 ingredients - tabasco peppers, salt, and distilled vinegar.

A number of hot sauce makers use fermented peppers in the form of pepper mash
to make their products, and a good pepper mash makes a difference in the
resulting flavors.

Learn more about How to Ferment Chili Peppers Here or try this Fermented Hot
Sauce Recipe.

A big question I often receive from would-be hot sauce makers is -

### Should I ferment or use fresh peppers?

My answer is - BOTH!

I've made hot sauces using both techniques and I do not have a preference.
Fresh chili peppers offer a big range of flavors and heat. Fermented peppers
are mellower and often have more depth of flavor in comparison, but I wouldn't
say better flavor. Just different, more nuanced in a way.

Either way, I encourage you to try fermenting chili peppers and making hot
sauces from the resulting mash. Then, decide for yourself if it is worth it to
you.

Fermentation does take some time, usually a couple weeks minimum, for the
peppers to properly break down, though you can easily go longer.

I often ferment my peppers for 6 months at a time for making hot sauce the
next spring after my last harvest. See my

## Equipment Needed for Making Hot Sauce

You don't need a lot of fancy cooking tool to make hot sauce at home, just a
few basic things.

  * A good nonreactive pot for cooking the sauce
  * Food processor or blender
  * Glass jars or bottles
  * Strainer
  * Kitchen scale, for measuring peppers and other ingredients
  * PH strips or PH meter (affiliate link, my friends)- this is useful for checking the final acidity of your hot sauce
  * Latex gloves for handling hot peppers

## Safety Advice

When working with hotter peppers, including superhots, it is important to wear
gloves when handling the peppers both in raw and dried forms. The oils can get
on your skin and cause burning sensations. See above.

Need help? How to Stop the Chili Pepper Burn On Your Skin.

Also, the fumes from the chili peppers and/or the fine powders may get into
the air if you are not working in a well ventilated room, so you may want to
wear a mask and goggles. Superhot chili peppers, truly, are called superhots
for a reason.

## A Basic Hot Sauce Recipe - Let's Make Some Hot Sauce!

Here is a very simple hot sauce recipe that you can use a base. It is a non-
fermented recipe made Louisiana style with only chili peppers, vinegar and
salt.

**Ingredients**

  * 1 pound fresh chili peppers of choice
  * ½ \- 1 cup vinegar
  * 1/2-1 tablespoon salt

**Cooking Directions**

Wash the peppers and remove the stems. Remove the seeds, if desired. Add them
to a food processor along with the vinegar and salt and process until smooth.

Add the mixture to a pot and bring to a quick boil. Reduce the heat and simmer
for 15 minutes to allow the flavors to develop.

Remove from heat and cool. Add them to serving bottles, or strain out the pulp
first for a much thinner sauce and bottle.

Makes about 2 cups or so of hot sauce.

Obviously you can change things up A LOT with this recipe, as discussed in the
ingredients section below. You can introduce a mixture of peppers of varying
flavors and heat levels, add in vegetables like tomato, onion, garlic, and/or
carrots for big flavors, try fruit for sweetness, toss in interesting
seasonings, and so much more.

## A List of Hot Sauce Recipes

You can always check out my Hot Sauce Recipes  and Sauce Recipes sections of
the site, but here is a good list for you to draw from, with different styles
and techniques from all over the world.

  * Aji Chili Sauce
  * Ancho-Jalapeno Hot Sauce
  * Caribbean Jerk-Peach Hot Sauce
  * Caribbean Style Mango-Habanero Hot Sauce
  * Carolina Reaper Hot Sauce
  * Chermoula
  * Chimichurri
  * Chimchurri Rojo
  * Cuban Mojo
  * Datil Pepper Sauce
  * Devil's Tongue Hot Sauce
  * Fermented Aji-Garlic Hot Sauce
  * Ghost Pepper Hot Sauce
  * Hawaiian Chili Water
  * Homemade Buffalo Sauce
  * Homemade Cayenne Pepper Sauce
  * Homemade Chili-Garlic Sauce (like Asian Huy Fong chili-garlic sauce)
  * Homemade Fire Cider
  * Homemade Harissa
  * Homemade Tabasco Sauce
  * Homemade Sriracha (both fermented and non-fermented varieties)
  * Honey Roasted Hot Pepper Hot Sauce
  * How to Make Louisiana Style Hot Sauce
  * Jamaican Scotch Bonnet Pepper Sauce
  * Peach-Scotch Bonnet Hot Sauce
  * Peri Peri Sauce
  * Puerto Rican Pique
  * Roasted Red Hatch Chile Sauce
  * Roasted Red Jalapeno Hot Sauce
  * Salsa Roja
  * Salsa Verde
  * Spicy Serrano Hot Sauce
  * Sweet Pepper Chili Sauce
  * Ti-Malice - Hatian Creole Hot Sauce
  * Sambal Oelek
  * Scotch Bonnet Curry Hot Sauce
  * Southwest Creamy Jalapeno Sauce
  * Superhot Hot Sauce (The Hottest Damn Hot Sauce I Ever Made)

I will keep adding to this last as I make the sauces. There are so many! I
love it.

## Preserving Your Hot Sauce - It's all about the Acidity

By far one of the most common questions I receive about hot sauce making is -
how long will this hot sauce keep? Can I bottle or can it to keep it longer?

The answer it all about the PH level of the hot sauce. It should keep a few
months easily in the fridge, or even longer. It's all about the acidity. To be
technical, target level ph for shelf stable foods is below 4.6 ph, but should
probably be lower for home cooks, around 4.0 or so, to account for errors.
Many home hot sauce makers prefer 3.5 or lower.

If you're concerned, add more vinegar to lower the ph. Sauces made with
fermented chili peppers will last even longer.

You can measure ph levels with ph strips or a good ph meter, which you can
pick up from Amazon or other retailers. As I can't vouch for the accuracy of
them, however, it is best to shoot for a lower acidity as mentioned, around
4.0 or lower. 3.5 is idea. The PH meter I use and love is from Thermoworks,
where I am an affiliate. Check out the Thermoworks PH Meters here  (affiliate
link, my friends).

And yes, you can process your hot sauce either in a hot water bath or with a
pressure canner. Just be sure to use proper canning/jarring safety procedures.

## Using the Leftover Pulp from Straining Hot Sauce

With certain hot sauce recipes, you have the option to strain the sauce to
thin it out and remove the chunky stuff. What remains is a pulp of the
ingredients used to make your hot sauce.

Do not throw that pulp away! It is a rich collection of flavorful ingredients
and there is plenty of life left in it. You can dehydrate it to make a
homemade seasoning blend. Isn't that awesome? I'm a huge advocate for
dehydrating - I am the author of "The Spicy Dehydrator Cookbook" - and a huge
advocate for making fun and interesting seasonings.

Essentially, spread the pulp out over dehydrator sheets and dehydrate it for
8-10 hours at 125 degrees F, or until it is completely dried through. Grind it
up with a grinder or a mortar and pestle and save it in airtight containers.
Use it as you would any seasoning blend.

Learn more at this page - Making Seasoning Blends from Strained Hot Sauce
Pulp.

## Cooking with Hot Sauce

Hot sauce doesn't have to be a finisher only. Sure, it's great for dashing
over practically anything, but you can use it as a base as well. Here are some
ideas for cooking with hot sauce to help you get going.

### SPICY COCKTAILS

Hot sauce is ideal for making spicy drinks. A Bloody Mary isn't a Bloody Mary
without a bit of heat, in our opinion. Bring on the spice! Or how about a
Michelada? Check out our Cocktail Recipes.

### VINAIGRETTES/DRESSINGS

Swirl a bit of hot sauce into a mixture of oil and vinegar, or replace the
vinegar altogether with a vinegar-based hot sauce, and taste the difference in
your typical vinaigrette. I like to swirl a bit of hot sauce into some Mexican
crema or sour cream to form a super quick dressing for chicken or fish.

### DIPS

Think hot sauce and hummus, so very creamy and spicy. How about spiking a bit
of mayo and cream cheese with hot sauce for a quick dipper? Bust out the chips
and beer. See our Dips Recipes.

### PASTA SAUCE

Save kitchen time by mixing hot sauce with tomato sauce for a quick pasta.
Anywhere from 1 teaspoon to half a bottle of hot sauce to 2 cups of tomato
based sauce can do wonders. Check out our Pasta Recipes.

### BUFFALO SAUCE STARTERS

Take a sauce like Valentina or Tapatio and add butter for a very basic Buffalo
sauce. Add in other ingredients to develop your flavors, such as Parmesan
cheese, other chili peppers, garlic, herbs, and more. Toss with wings or
chicken strips. Go!

### STUFFED PEPPERS

We're crazy for stuffed peppers, and hot sauce can save you a lot of time in
the kitchen so you don't have to make a sauce from scratch. Besides, most
quick sauces won't be as developed as a well-made hot sauce. See our Stuffed
Pepper Recipes.

### GROUND MEATS

If you add a tablespoon or 2 to any ground meat mixture, be it for burgers,
meatballs, meatloaf, patties, or whatever, you'll add both moisture and
flavor.

### CHILI

Spice up your best chili in a bowl, with or without beans. Cook it a while,
low and slow, to really let that hot sauce permeate your chili. Hot sauce can
REALLY make your chili POP. Truly essential. Check out our Chili Recipes.

### HOMEMADE SPICY MUSTARD

If you enjoy making your own mustard from scratch, starting with mustard seed,
stir some hot sauce into the mix and let it percolate. Check out my Homemade
Mustard Recipes.

### MARINADES

Hot sauce by itself can be a marinade, or use it as a starter and temper some
of the heat with a bit of citrus or even water or broth.

### COMPOUND BUTTER

Soften butter, mix in your favorite hot sauce, then roll it back up and firm
it up in the fridge. AWESOME for grilled meats and you get bonus points for
presentation.

Learn more at this page - Cooking with Hot Sauce.

## Some Hot Sauce Making FAQs

I get a LOT of questions about making hot sauce. Here are some of the most
common.

## Where'd you get those sauce bottles?

I find them locally sometimes, but I also order through Amazon. Here is a link
to some bottles I like (affiliate link, my friends!): Swing Top Glass Bottles,
8.5 Ounce - Set of 4. If you like the smaller bottles that most hot sauce
makers use, here's another link: Hot Sauce Bottles, 5 Oz - 24 Pack.

## How Can I Make My Hot Sauce Thicker?

The best way to thicken a hot sauce is to limit the amount of liquid added in
the beginning. Try adding in only a half of the recommended amount of liquid,
then process the hot sauce. You can always add in liquid to thin it out more
if it is too thick.

Also, don't strain the sauce. Straining the pulp from your hot sauce will
significantly thin it out.

However, if you've already made your hot sauce, strained it, and want to
thicken it up, one way to do so is to simmer it over low heat. The heat will
reduce the water content and it will thicken.

You can also incorporate a thickener, such corn starch, arrowroot, or xanthan
gum by mixing a tablespoon or more with water, then swirling into the
simmering hot sauce. This can affect the flavor, however, so be prepared. This
is a classic way to thicken gravies.

## How Can I Make My Hot Sauce Hotter?

The best way to make your hot sauce hotter is to incorporate a spicy chili
powder. Of course starting with hotter peppers is the best method for this,
but sometimes the process of making a hot sauce can tamp down some of that
fresh chili pepper heat.

I like to keep several good hot pepper powders, like 7 Pot Power or Caroline
Reaper Powder on hand to swirl into my sauces and foods to really spice things
up.

## How Can I Make My Hot Sauce Milder?

Diluting your finished hot sauce is the best way to tame the heat. If you've
made a sauce and find that it is just too hot to consume, try making another
batch without the peppers, if possible. Incorporate carrots or tomatoes, then
combine the two sauces for a milder overall sauce.

Adding sweetness can help, too. Try honey, agave nectar, or a bit of sugar or
brown sugar, if those flavors fit the hot sauce. You'll still get plenty of
heat, but the sweetness helps to balance some of it.

Dairy is another way to combat the heat. Of course this will completely change
the character of your hot sauce, but consider adding cream to help.

## How to Make Hot Sauce for Wings?

Classic Buffalo style wing sauce is a slightly different thing from making hot
sauce, but really, at its core it is a mixture of Hot Sauce and Butter. Just
swirl in a few tablespoons of butter into your simmering hot sauce and you've
got the makings of Buffalo Wing Sauce.

Check out my Homemade Buffalo Sauce Recipe here.

## Starting Your Own Hot Sauce Business

Hot sauce making usually starts as a home kitchen hobby. For some, it develops
into a true passion and even progresses into a business idea. There is a
vibrant hot sauce market in the U.S. today, and wouldn't it be wonderful to be
a part of it, selling your own brand of hot sauce to the masses of spicy food
lovers?

If you've reached this level, here are some steps and advice to consider when
bringing your product to market.

### **Perfect Your Hot Sauce.**

This should go without saying, but your hot sauce needs to be the best hot
sauce it can be. Test your recipes thoroughly. Invite friends over to give you
a reaction. Try them out on acquaintances. Get a lot of feedback, not only on
the taste, but the color, heat level, smell and more. Take notes and listen.
Your product is the most important thing.

### **Branding.**

How you market your sauce will greatly impact your overall sales. Carefully
consider what you want to call your hot sauce. Do you want a more serious
name? Or perhaps something funny? Something whimsical? Profound?

Born to Hula's "Reaper of Sorrow" would get a different reaction if they had
named it "Rectum Destroyer".

What about labels? A professionally designed label will be perceived as more
professional than a cheap label printed at home and slapped on a bottle.

### **Do Your Research.**

Learn more about how the market works (and sells!) by checking out other hot
sauces and hot sauce makers. Go to hot sauce and spicy food shows and
introduce yourself. Hot sauce makers are some of the friendliest people I've
ever met, and their passion for their products exudes. You're guaranteed to
meet someone happy to tell you their story and how they got into the business.

### **Production.**

If you're going to sell hot sauce, the biggest question is, where will you
make it? You're going to need a commercial kitchen. You can't make large batch
hot sauce out of your home kitchen and meet all FDA requirements, so research
commercial kitchens in your area. You can often rent them by the day.

### **Or, Consider a Co-Packer.**

Instead of making the hot sauce yourself, some companies offer the services to
take your recipe and make it for you in their own production facility. For a
fee, they will not only source the ingredients and make the sauce, but will
bottle it and ship it to you with labels and all. Consider your costs on such
a service, but it can be a huge time saver.

### **Food Safety and Legal.**

If you're going to sell your own hot sauce, you'll need to ensure your new
company follows all legal requirements. Here is a good resource with links to
Commercial Kitchens/Co-Packers, Federal Agencies, other Process Authorities,
Nutritional Analysis, and Trade Groups to help get you started:
http://necfe.foodscience.cals.cornell.edu/regulations

## Advice from Hot Sauce Makers

I reached out to some of the hot sauce makers I know and asked them what
advice they would give to would-be sauce makers looking to break into the
market. Here is what they had to say.

"The advice I would give to would be sauce makers wanting to start a new
business is this: Do your research. Initially do your research on food safety
and take a food safety course and read pertinent information from both the FDA
and local DOH. After that, decide if you want to manufacture yourself or co-
pack. Again, research. Starting up is an investment and the more you know
before you start shelling out money the less you waste making mistakes.
Finally ask questions. There's tons of sauce makers that have been where you
are and will be more than happy to answer questions, just don't expect them to
to do your work for you. Finally test your sauces on people who will give you
honest feedback. Friends and family will be biased for the most part. Honest
feedback may save you from spending a lot of time and money on a sauce nobody
wants. Be smart before you start." - Jeremy Walsh, Bigfat's Hot Sauce
(www.bigfatshotsauce.com).

"I tell everyone that asks me this question is that you better be ready to
work super long hours and have an extreme passion for the industry." - Steve
Seabury, High River Sauces (www.highriversauces.com)

"On the light side I would say to remember all the people that said, ' _This
is great-you should get it in stores_ ', and remind them of that when you need
financing!" - Bill White, Slap You Silly Hot Sauce (www.slapyousilly.net)

Thank you, my friends, readers, and spicy food lovers. If you have any
questions or comments, contact me any time or leave a comment below. I will be
adding more information here as I acquire it. Good luck making your hot sauce!
-- Mike H.

  *   *   *   *   * 

Categories: Cooking Tips Tags: Chili Pepper Madness, chili pepper recipe, hot
sauce recipe

## Reader Interactions

### Comments

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name *

Email *

Recipe Rating Recipe Rating  
  
  
  
  

  1. Levi Armstrong says

September 22, 2021 at 1:03 am

  
It's interesting to know that often that chili pepper flavor, spice, and
sometimes heat becomes synonymous with a particular culture. My brother is a
chef who will start creating new recipes with the Canadian-made hot sauce
supply he received last week. I'll share this with him since it could help
with his experimentation. Thanks!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 22, 2021 at 6:08 am

Thanks for sharing, Levi.

Reply

  2. Brian Stewart says

September 20, 2021 at 12:53 am

  
Mike,  
Great work you do here. You're my go to for everything spicy. In your guide
you have a section for thickening a sauce, however I need the opposite. I made
a sauce about a month ago and it's quite thick, like a cold applesauce. What
would be the best way to thin this out so I can bottle it. Thanks for all you
do!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 20, 2021 at 5:37 am

Thanks, Brian. The best way to thin it out is to simply add more liquid. You
can add water, vinegar, lime or lemon juice, or stock, all depending on your
initial ingredients are flavor goals. Often a splash of water is totally fine.
Enjoy!

Reply

  3. Michael says

September 04, 2021 at 8:28 am

Mike  
What about using dried peppers?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 04, 2021 at 9:26 am

Michael, I have a post for that here - How to Make Hot Sauce from Dried
Peppers (https://www.chilipeppermadness.com/recipes/how-to-make-hot-sauce-
from-dried-peppers/). Let me know what you come up with!

Reply

  4. Simon says

August 03, 2021 at 7:12 pm

  
Hi Mike, you are great as usual!  
I have a question, are pH strips any good to test the pH? Kind of worried
that, given the strong color of most sauces, will be really difficult to read
the pH...

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

August 04, 2021 at 6:02 am

Thanks, Simon. I appreciate it. The pH strips are OK to use, but not as
accurate as a pH reader. I suggest buying one of those for more accurate
readings. I recommend this one from Thermoworks, where I am an affiliate: PH
meter - https://www.thermoworks.com/pH-Humidity/pH?tw=CPM (affiliate link, my
friends).

Reply

  5. David says

July 11, 2021 at 11:59 pm

  
Oh, and my homemade sauce also included garlic and ginger. Forgot to nention
those...

Reply

  6. David says

July 11, 2021 at 11:57 pm

  
Thanks for a really informative and inspiring article, Mike - it inspired me
to make my second-ever hot sauce (fresh jalapenos, cayennes, and Thai bird's
eyes, dried peppers, apple cider vinegar, soy sauce, lime juice, honey, salt),
which has turned out really well.

If I could suggest an addition, the Asian sauce section could mention sweet
hot sauces, which are quite popular there. Well-known comnercial brands
include Mae Ploy (Thailand), Poonsin Vietnamese Dipping Sauce, and Lingham's
(Malaysia), and there are many more.

Overall, a very well-rounded article.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

July 12, 2021 at 5:20 am

Excellent! Thanks, David!

Reply

  7. Justin Michael Carpenter says

June 20, 2021 at 8:17 am

Thanks again Mike I ended up ordering a ninja last night because the hamilton
beach I bought was not cutting it. I thought adding to much water could throw
the PH, but I will definitely try that next time.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 20, 2021 at 10:28 am

Sure thing, Justin. Enjoy the hot sauce.

Reply

  8. Justin Michael Carpenter says

June 19, 2021 at 8:52 pm

SO I've noticed that when I rough chop my peppers bring to a boil, and let
simmer for 15 minutes after the puree the sauce is still stupid thick, and I
cannot figure out what I'm doing incorrectly... I added more vinegar, but I'm
worried about throwing off the taste of the sauce.it doesn't strain the best
either. Should I puree for longer, or could it be the cilantro? Right now I'm
stuck with this really thick sauce, and while it tastes OK, but I'd like
something smoother

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 20, 2021 at 7:53 am

Justin, you can always thin with a bit of water and that won't affect flavor
at all. Or, use other liquids, but it sounds like it needs to be thinned.
Also, yes, puree for longer until you get it nice and smooth. Could be time
for a better blender possibly. Let me know how it goes.

Reply

  9. Justin Michael Carpenter says

June 18, 2021 at 11:26 pm

Will dehydrated peppers made into a hot sauce taste as good as fresh peppers
or at least about the same?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 19, 2021 at 5:35 am

Justin, that's really a matter of personal preference, and something you'd
need to decide for yourself. I greatly enjoy them, but find some of the
different from hot sauces made with fresh pods. Each is good in its own way.
See my post on How to Make Hot Sauce from Dried Peppers
(https://www.chilipeppermadness.com/recipes/how-to-make-hot-sauce-from-dried-
peppers/).

Reply

  10. Justin Carpenter says

June 15, 2021 at 11:37 pm

I'm so excited I just completed my first hotsauce ever 😀 Its got a subtle
almost sweet start with hints of cilantro, and then the heat builds up for
some seconds plateaus and then lingers. Thank you so much Mike for enduring my
endless questions, and being my source of inspiration. This is going to be an
amazing adventure 😀

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 16, 2021 at 6:06 am

Sure thing, Justin. Glad to be helpful. Super happy it turned out the way you
wanted! I'm sure there will be many more in your future.

Reply

  11. Justin carpenter says

June 14, 2021 at 12:11 pm

I guess my only other question regarding booze in hot sauce is how much booze
to use

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 14, 2021 at 12:16 pm

I wouldn't use too much, unless you want it very thin. Maybe replace part of
the vinegar content with booze and see how it turns out. Test and adjust from
there. Let me know how it all goes.

Reply

  12. Justin Carpenter says

June 14, 2021 at 8:43 am

Hey Mike got a tough one for you... I want to make a hot sauce using tequila
as it has the most stable PH out the door. I'm wondering if I should finish
the sauce by adding the tequila, or if I should simmer it, and finish, or
could I ferment the peppers, and fruit in the booze? I know the simmering
stops the fermenting process. What I'm after here is a little kick, and a
stable shelf life.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 14, 2021 at 11:04 am

Hey, Justin. You can realistically add the tequila both before OR after
fermentation (if you ferment at all). Depends on your ultimate flavor goal. I
cook with a lot of booze in sauces, and usually let it simmer to burn out the
alcohol and incorporate the other flavoring ingredients. My preference, as it
really melds and balances. Adding booze to a ferment would likely mess with
the fermentation process. If fermenting, I would add it after the mash is
complete to your satisfaction, then simmer, but this will stop the fermenting
process and reduce probiotic benefits (yet keep flavor benefits). I hope this
helps.

Reply

  13. Justin Carpenter says

June 12, 2021 at 11:18 am

Oh man I sure did I love that video. My second recipe is based on the steps
you took in that video. I'm running serrano's with poblano and some bell and
cilantro

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 12, 2021 at 12:00 pm

Thanks, Justin!

Reply

  14. Justin Carpenter says

June 12, 2021 at 10:11 am

That's awesome thank you so much. I've been down with my wisdom teeth being
taken out so I've written a few simple recipes I plan to try as my first
sauces. I was a bit concerned with the second one because I had 1 1/4 lbs of
peppers. I'm going to tweek that because I'm going for more of a Louisiana
style sauce.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 12, 2021 at 10:14 am

Sure thing, Justin. Be sure to check out my Louisiana Hot Sauce Recipe:
https://www.chilipeppermadness.com/chili-pepper-recipes/hot-sauces/homemade-
louisiana-hot-sauce/. You can adjust as needed as well. Let me know how it all
goes.

Reply

  15. Justin says

June 11, 2021 at 11:01 pm

So I've been watching a lot of videos, and reading an insane amount of things
about making hotsauce. One thing I have seen is something of an inconstancy in
the amount of peppers used (the weight) A lot of your recipes seem to use the
1lb rule is this a good rule of thumb to work by?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 12, 2021 at 8:56 am

Justin, 1 pound is a good amount to start with. Realistically, the amount of
peppers CAN vary wildly, as it all comes down to personal preference. If you
used less compared to the other ratios, you'd still get a good hot sauce, just
thinner.

Reply

  16. Justin Carpenter says

June 11, 2021 at 12:50 am

at the part where it says Add them to a food processor and process to break
them apart is that a puree or what setting should it be on? I'm aiming for a
very smooth sauce without a lot of chunks

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 11, 2021 at 5:56 am

Justin, process the peppers with the vinegar and salt in a food processor
until nice and smooth. That is the best way. I made a small adjustment to the
text to clarify. Also, see my other hot sauce recipes for good examples.

Reply

  17. Ryan says

June 07, 2021 at 9:40 am

  
Yea, That was awesome, Thank You

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 07, 2021 at 11:10 am

Thanks, Ryan!

Reply

  18. jeffrey palmer says

June 06, 2021 at 7:30 am

  
I am a faithful reader of your emails. Now I wish I could even dup or master
this hot sauce. It was made in ElPaso Tx - it had finely shredded carrots and
veg oil (no vinegar) and a lime hint to it along with finely diced habeneros.
Actually there were the seeds from the pepper in it too

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 06, 2021 at 7:37 am

Thanks, Jeffrey! I hope you can master it!

Reply

  19. Steven Kellerman says

May 17, 2021 at 2:51 pm

  
Would it be best to ferment my peppers to get my hot sauce to look reddish in
color like Frank’s Hot Sauce?  
Also I’m trying to come up with a Mambo sauce for my steak Hoagies if you have
any advice on that.  
Thanks for all the great info!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

May 18, 2021 at 5:57 am

Steven, it isn't really the ferment that gives the color, but the actual
peppers. Choose the reddest peppers you can find and try not to dilute with
too many other ingredients which can change the color. I'll have to experiment
with making some Mambo sauce.

Reply

  20. Peter Mabbutt says

April 23, 2021 at 3:13 pm

great article. I'm looking into making some hot sauce of my own. I read
somewhere there can be issues with cooked vegetables in hot sauce rather than
fresh. I wanted to use caramelised onions and grilled tomatoes. Do you think
this is OK or are there issues I may run into? Thanks.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

April 24, 2021 at 7:08 am

Peter, you can use cooked vegetables. In reality, you need to cook them to
process into a sauce in many cases, so absolutely.

Reply

  21. Kristy says

April 06, 2021 at 11:56 am

  
Mike, thanks for this great article! Thanks for describing different kinds of
hot sauces around the world -- very interesting!  
I found your pineapple habanero sauce recipe and will be trying it this
evening.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

April 06, 2021 at 12:35 pm

Thanks, Kristy! I appreciate it. Hot sauce is the best!

Reply

  22. Dorottya says

March 04, 2021 at 4:48 am

Hey, very cool summary and interesting read, good tips as well! 🙂  
One note: Erős Pista, the Hungarian chili paste you are referring means
"Strong Steve", rather than Hungry Steve. 🙂 Fun fact, there is a non-hot
version, prepped with the same technique, but from mild paprika, which is
called "Édes Anna" --> Sweet Anne.

Regards, a Hungarian chili enthusiast

Reply

  23. Brandon says

February 15, 2021 at 5:36 pm

Hey, just found your site. A ton of great info on here to get lost in. Curious
your thoughts on roasting peppers in general. Secondly, if you roast them,
does that effect whether or not you should ferment? Thank you!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

February 16, 2021 at 6:51 am

Hey, Brandon. Roasting your peppers is a GREAT way to bring out their flavors.
I do it all the time for sauces and meals. Works very nicely for hot sauce as
well. Also, you CAN ferment roasted peppers. However, you might need either a
fermentation starter, or you can add them to the brine with fresh pods to
kickstart the process, if needed.

Reply

  24. Mackenzie says

January 28, 2021 at 9:15 am

  
This recipe was SUPER useful to me in getting started. My current sauce is 10
ounces habanero, 6 ounces cayenne, salt and vinegar, and a few cloves of
garlic - and now, it's my go-to sauce for just about everything! It's just so
tasty, so thank you!

But I have a question: With such a simple recipe, what herbs or spices would
you recommend experimenting with to take the sauce to the next level? What
should I put in my next batch to see if it makes it better?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

January 28, 2021 at 1:06 pm

Thanks, Mackenzie. Glad to be helpful. Hard to say what will bring it to the
next level for you, as there are many possibilities as well as ratios and
personal preferences. Definitely experiment with fresh herbs and other
seasonings. Fruit is always fun to play with. I love habanero with mango or
pineapple. Other veggies are great, too. You'd be surprised how versatile
carrots can be. Have fun experimenting!!! I'd love to hear about your new
combinations.

Reply

  25. Franklin Oros says

November 08, 2020 at 3:13 pm

I've enjoyed extended stays in Madagascar where I fell in love with a hot
sauce made from piquin (bird) peppers. Since, I've seen it identified in a
couple of ways –– "sakay" or "Madagascar Sauce Dynamite". I came pretty close
by combining Thai bird peppers with ginger, garlic, onion, thyme, tomato
paste, vinegar and salt. Can you kindly shed any more light on this sauce? The
Malagasy use it on just about anything. Thank you.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 09, 2020 at 1:38 pm

Thanks, Franklin. Sakay means "spicy" in Malagasy, and it's a pretty versatile
"everything" sauce. It's made mostly with peppers, oil and vinegar, then
adjusted with other ingredients to taste.

Reply

  26. Barbara A. says

September 14, 2020 at 1:12 am

  
Have you ever tried aged balsamic in a recipe? The thick sweet kind, aged 10+
years? oOOOo I have a recipe forming in my brain that I feel would be sooo
good! Just wondering if you’ve tried this.?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 14, 2020 at 7:22 am

I have not, Barbara, but I'm sure it would be delicious! I love aged balsamic!
Had some GREAT ones in Italy.

Reply

  27. Rosa E Rangel says

September 10, 2020 at 2:40 pm

  
Thanks for sharing a excellent recipe, as a mexican I am , I love food and
some other staff with a little bit of ¨¨fire¨¨ hot sauce. Best regards

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 11, 2020 at 2:58 pm

Thanks, Rosa. Yes, keep it spicy!

Reply

  28. DM says

August 24, 2020 at 1:33 pm

  
Excellent article. Lots of great insights. Thank you for sharing!

Reply

  29. Brian Fedie says

July 01, 2020 at 7:43 am

Really like your YouTube show. Stupid Question: Can you rehydrate chili pepper
powder and then ferment it? I'd guess that you'd have to add some live veggies
to start the process. ?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

July 01, 2020 at 7:53 am

Brian, not sure about fermenting powders, though you can try it as you suggest
with some live veggies. However, some powders might contain anti-caking
ingredients that might inhibit fermentation, unless you are using homemade
chili powder. If you try it, let me know how it goes. Enjoy!

Reply

  30. Lance says

June 26, 2020 at 11:14 am

I loved the article. My brother is in culinary school and know I love hot
sauce and suggested I make my own. I was wondering if I could ask for some
advice with this recipe idea I have?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 26, 2020 at 11:27 am

Thanks, Lance. Send me an email anytime. Good luck with the sauce!

Reply

  31. Hanz says

April 09, 2020 at 5:02 am

Thanks for the great and comprehensive article. Our journey is only just
starting with some chilli seeds in egg boxes waiting to germinate, but really
can't wait to get cooking after reading this.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

April 09, 2020 at 6:44 am

Good luck, Hanz!

Reply

  32. bill says

March 26, 2020 at 4:08 pm

Hi there, what about using frozen peppers for hot sauce?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

March 26, 2020 at 4:22 pm

Bill, yep, you can surely make hot sauce with frozen peppers. Just thaw them
out and hot sauce away! Let me know how it turns out for you.

Reply

  33. Andre Liebenberg says

March 23, 2020 at 6:11 am

I made hot sauce as per your recipe and its very tasty . Only one thing I need
to know. After a day or so in the bottle their s a separation of fluid on top.
Is that ok or what?  
Thankfully

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

March 23, 2020 at 7:12 am

Andre, yes, it is OK as long as the peppers stay submerged under the liquid.
If they rise above and poke upward, push them down to make sure they are
covered. Otherwise the can rot.

Reply

  34. glen spencer says

February 08, 2020 at 2:36 pm

Hello, Mike. I'm wondering about the vinegar. I use Lime juice when I make my
homemade salsa. Now I was trying to make chipotle hot sauce out of a recipe. I
found with just water and vinegar and salt. I did run it through a strainer.
It was liquidy in this morning. It's rather thick. I'm just wondering about
using two acids. Is that a good thing? Thank you. I'll be back for more
information.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

February 09, 2020 at 8:49 am

Glen, yes, you can use 2 acids, like vinegar and lime juice. It's really to
your own flavor preferences. No problem!

Reply

      * Glen says

February 13, 2020 at 4:55 pm

Thank you.

Reply

  35. David Andre says

January 09, 2020 at 3:36 pm

What happens if I eliminate or drastically cut salt from recipes? I am on a
salt free diet and dearly miss my hot sauce. I still cheat and use a bit.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

January 09, 2020 at 4:02 pm

David, you can absolutely reduce or even skip the salt with hot sauces. You
may miss some of the flavor, but you'll still get plenty. Or try some salt
alternatives. Let me know how it goes for you.

Reply

  36. Roger says

December 17, 2019 at 9:52 pm

Hey Michael,

Thank you for all that you do! I am just processing my first batch of
fermented peppers and had a question about preservation... Do you sterilize
your woozy bottles before filling? If my ph is in the recommended levels and I
am keeping the bottles refrigerated once filled is it really necessary? Thanks
again!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

December 18, 2019 at 7:52 am

Hi, Roger. It is best practices to be as clean as possible. If you feel your
bottles are clean enough with sterilizing them, I'm sure you'll be fine since
you're keeping them refrigerated. Let me know how it turns out for you.

Reply

  37. Deena says

November 11, 2019 at 1:05 pm

I was wondering about the preserving process. Do they need to be processed in
a water bath like a can should or is it mostly dependent on the acidity how
long it will last on the shelf? I'm seeing that most of the containers for hot
sauce aren't conducive to the hot water bath since the lids are made with
plastic. But I'd like to make sure they last a while in the cabinet.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 11, 2019 at 2:13 pm

Deena, yes, you can preserve them with the water bath method. Check out the
USDA Site for good preserving steps:
https://nchfp.uga.edu/publications/publications_usda.html. You can use small
jars to process them instead of the bottles, which won't work because of the
plastic caps. There are some woozy bottles with different caps you can process
that you can search for online. The main thing is to get the pH down to 3.5 or
lower for home preserving. Target level ph for shelf stable foods is below 4.6
ph, but should probably be lower for home cooks, around 4.0 or so, to account
for errors. Many home hot sauce makers prefer 3.5 or lower. Or, you can use a
pressure canner. Let me know if this helps.

Reply

  38. JohnE says

November 07, 2019 at 9:58 pm

I found a better way to thicken many sauces and not alter the consistency
(subjective taste) or flavor quality with food starches as corn, potato, or
wheat.  
Xanthan gum is easy to use if you add it sparingly until the desired thickness
is reached.

Deer wiped out most of my garden this year. Luckily I have a good stock of
dried Thai, Korean, Ghost, and Habanero chilies to make sauces and dips as
needed for the next year..

I have enough Mae Ploy for another year. I mention this as I use Guar Gum to
thicken my Mae Ploy as it is a cool dipping sauce and to keep it authentic .

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 08, 2019 at 8:29 am

Thanks, John. Xantham gum is not something I have experimented with, but a lot
of commercial and artisan hot sauce makers use it, so absolutely. I appreciate
the input!

Reply

  39. Tim says

November 04, 2019 at 7:00 pm

Thanks for the full "one stop" website. My growing season just ended. I have
21 lbs of jalapenos, about 20 lbs of both serrano and pepperocini. Pepperocini
are turning a nice red and get a little heat to them, but my jalapenos and
serranos are having a hard time turning red. Can I make hot sauce with them
still green? Oh, and 1 bush of habanero too (getting a nice orange:)

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 04, 2019 at 7:06 pm

Hi, Tim. Glad you found me. Absolutely, YES you can make a hot sauce with
green jalapenos and serranos. Take a look at the hot sauce recipes section and
you'll find a few green sauces. Just follow the exact same instructions and
you'll get a nice green hot sauce. Good luck, and let me know what you wind up
making.

Reply

  40. Jennifer E Bent says

November 03, 2019 at 4:40 pm

Thank you. Some important info here. I am in Jamaica and want to start a
business with Amajen's Jamaican Hot Sauce.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 04, 2019 at 8:03 am

Good luck with your hot sauce business, Jennifer!

Reply

  41. Antonija says

July 06, 2019 at 3:56 pm

Hi!

Loving the website. A lot of great stuff, came here looking for Serrano SHU
value, ended up spending over an hour looking at hot sauces and pepper info.  
One small correction regarding European hot sauces.  
Ajvar comes in hot variety, and it can be pretty hot. The other sauce is named
Ljutenica, ljuto meaning spicy/hot. 🙂

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

July 07, 2019 at 12:37 pm

Thank you, Antonija! I appreciate it!

Reply

  42. Tango Jones says

June 21, 2019 at 1:34 pm

Great site and very happy with the results of a couple of your recipes.

I've lazily tried searching the internet, but just wondered if you could give
us an idea of the pHs of various vinegars (I appreciate that they vary) and
whether it's okay to mix the higher pH vinegars with the lower ones.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 22, 2019 at 10:42 am

Thanks, Tango. I've made many sauces and hot sauces with many different types
of vinegar. For me, it comes down to flavor and final pH. If you enjoy the
flavor of a particular vinegar, I say use it. It'll only make your final sauce
that much better to you. For pH, it is best to keep your sauce to about 3.5 pH
or below for longer keeping, so measure accordingly. You can always add water
to dilute if needed. If the sauce is going to be consumed more quickly, the pH
isn't quite as important, so focus on flavor instead. I hope this helps. Happy
to discuss.

Reply

      * Carl H. Bernat says

November 12, 2019 at 1:27 am

So the ph level changes by cooking the sauce or merely adding a vinegar or
citrus or both?

Reply

        * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 12, 2019 at 8:05 am

Carl, the pH changes with the addition of vinegar and/or citrus, which are
acids and help preserve the food.

Reply

  43. Juliana Meade says

May 31, 2019 at 12:47 pm

very informative, thanks for sharing. I cook pepper sauce for sale in the
Caribbean and I do not have to refrigerate at all. the shelf life is good for
months.

Reply

  44. Jay says

May 26, 2019 at 4:13 pm

OMG this is awesome. I can't wait to try all of these. I'm going to burn my
blender up making all of them. One of the best guides I have ever seen.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

May 27, 2019 at 10:50 am

Excellent, Jay! Thanks, and good luck!!

Reply

  45. Franco says

April 17, 2019 at 3:54 pm

Thank you for this, a truly inspiring read! Growing 10 types of Chili's this
year to go mad with, and this just gave me the wildest ideas!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

April 17, 2019 at 10:19 pm

Excellent!

Reply

  46. Sergio says

December 12, 2018 at 12:34 pm

Great read, thank you! So using a basic recipe as you shared earlier, could
one then simply bottle it and keep it out the refrigerator for months before
opening? And then once opening keep it in the refrigerator. Looking at
producing my hot sauce for stores and markets etc, and wondering on it's dry
shelf life before refrigeration. Thank you! Sergio

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

December 12, 2018 at 1:08 pm

Thanks, Sergio. If you want to keep it out of the fridge for longer periods of
time before opening, it is best to do a hot pack and process the sauce for
longer term storage. I hope this helps. Many home makers believe the low
acidity is enough to keep their sauces out of the fridge, but when you have
commercial considerations, the standards are much more strict.

Reply

  47. Joe Zap says

November 30, 2018 at 12:58 pm

After I make these, let them cool, and add to sterilized bottles can I just
mail to my family with a heat wrap seal. Does it have to be refrigerated and
ship cold? I made several in 5 oz hot sauce shaker bottles. Just wanted to
keep it safe. It was boiled and simmered for 10-12 minutes.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 30, 2018 at 1:42 pm

Joe, if everything is cleaned and your ph is low enough, you should be able to
wrap it up and mail it. I would just keep it in the refrigerator upon
receiving and opening.

Reply

      * Joe says

December 01, 2018 at 6:16 am

Thank you.

Reply

  48. Heather Dewey says

November 11, 2018 at 11:55 am

Hi Mike. My friends and family loved my hot sauces this year and now i ran
out. I have some hot pepper powder and i want to recreate my recipes with
that. Can you give me an idea about ratios when it comes to fresh vs dried
powder? For example: If the recipe calls for 10 ghost peppers how much powder
should i use?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 11, 2018 at 3:10 pm

Hi, Heather. That would wind up being about 3-4 tablespoons of powder. Try it
with 3 and see how it comes out. You can always add in more later. Let me know
how it goes.

Reply

  49. Ashley says

October 14, 2018 at 8:16 am

Is it possible to substitute apple cider vinegar in place of white distilled?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 15, 2018 at 8:16 am

Ashley, absolutely!

Reply

  50. Charles says

October 06, 2018 at 11:56 am

Try the Mulilo chili sauce made from Kambuzi chilis which are grown in south
Eastern Africa country of Malawi. Its unique flavor will leave you looking for
more.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 06, 2018 at 12:08 pm

Thanks, Charles! One I'll definitely have to try.

Reply

  51. Wayne Lind says

September 09, 2018 at 4:17 pm

Thank you Mike for the great pepper site. I made the real simply sauce and it
is wonder. I Used red wine vinegar, lemon juice Kosher salt and a good splash
of liquid smoke. Left half the seeds of the Jalapas. Very warm and a nice
flavour.  
I have lots of peppers so I will try smoking and dehydrate some.  
Thanks Again

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 10, 2018 at 6:05 am

That's GREAT, Wayne. Thanks!

Reply

  52. Robin Eaton-Novak says

September 09, 2018 at 2:18 pm

Great article! My peppers are doing fabulous this year. My ghost is exploding!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 10, 2018 at 6:05 am

Thanks, Robin!

Reply

  53. Noel says

September 06, 2018 at 4:54 pm

Cheers Mike - always a good read and plenty of ideas.

Thanks for sharing.

????

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 07, 2018 at 6:13 am

Thanks, Noel!

Reply

  54. Chris says

September 06, 2018 at 11:39 am

Hiya chap,if you haven't found a good UK brand of hot chili sauces check out
http://WWW.NORFOLKHEATWAVE.COM I recommend Nelsons ghost as a great starting
point!.

Reply

## Primary Sidebar

**ALL. SPICY. RECIPES.** Hi, I’m Mike and I LOVE Spicy Food! Say goodbye to
bland and boring food with my easy-to-follow recipes. Let’s get cooking!

More about me →

Mexican

Cajun

Sauces

Seasonings

### 5 ESSENTIALS FOR SPICY COOKING

Subscribe and receive my FREE email series with tips for spicy cooking and new
Recipes

**AMAZON / BARNES & NOBLE / ** **INDIEBOUND  ** **/  BOOKS A MILLION**

**AMAZON / BARNES & NOBLE / INDIEBOUND**

### Most Popular Recipes

  * Bang Bang Chicken

  * Creamy Fish Taco Sauce

  * Mexican Birria Recipe

  * Homemade Blackening Seasoning

  * Michelada Recipe - Spicy Mexican Beer and Tomato Juice Cocktail

  * Pollo Guisado Recipe (Chicken Stew)

## Footer

## NEVER MISS A RECIPE

Receive my "5 Essentials for Spicy Cooking" email series & new recipes

Search

  *   *   *   *   * 

↑ back to top

About | Contact | Travel-Food | Stories | Privacy | Disclaimer | © 2022 Chili
Pepper Madness

EXCLUSIVE MEMBER OF MEDIAVINE FOOD

