https://www.chilipeppermadness.com/recipes/fermented-hot-sauce/


  * Skip to primary navigation
  * Skip to main content
  * Skip to primary sidebar

  *     * Facebook
    * Instagram
    * Pinterest
    * Twitter
    * YouTube

  * About
  * Cookbooks
  * Shop
  * Search

  * Recipe Index
  * RECIPES BY TYPE
    * BBQ/Grilled
    * Burgers
    * Chicken Wings
    * Chili
    * Curry
    * Dehydrator
    * Game Day
    * Hot Sauces
    * Jalapeno Poppers
    * Marinades
    * Pickling
    * Preserving
    * Quick and Easy
    * Salsas
    * Sauces
    * Seasonings
    * Stuffed Peppers
    * Tacos
  * COOKING TIPS
  * Pepper Info
    * Chili Pepper Types
    * The Scoville Scale
    * Hottest Peppers in the World
    * Growing Chili Peppers
    * Preserving
    * Health Benefits
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * Buy Plants & Seeds

menu icon

search icon

Search

  * Recipe Index
  * All Recipes
  * Pepper Info
  * Chili Pepper Types
  * The Scoville Scale
  * Growing Chili Peppers
  * Preserving
  * Chili Pepper Health Benefits
  * Frequently Asked Questions
  * Cooking Tips
  * Cookbooks
  * Shop
  * About Us

×

Home » Fermented Hot Sauce

# Fermented Hot Sauce

by Mike Hultquist · Sep 25, 2019 · 143 Comments

Jump to Recipe

  *   *   *   *   * 

_I grew loads of peppers in my garden this year just so I could make this
fermented hot sauce recipe. It is wonderfully spicy and big on flavor. Drizzle
it over anything. Works for any type of peppers._

It's hot sauce making time in the Chili Pepper Madness household again, my
friends. You know how much I LOVE my hot sauce. My garden exploded with
peppers this year and I'm incredibly happy. The plants were super productive
and I am preserving them in so many different ways.

Food preservation is important. One of my favorite ways to preserve my peppers
is to make hot sauce. I have a LOT of different hot sauce recipes here on the
site, all with different styles, ingredients, and types of chili peppers. For
this particular hot sauce, I wanted a fermented version, which adds another
layer of complexity to the sauce.

I grew serrano peppers and waited for them to turn red specifically so I could
make this sauce. So many serranos! The plant was very productive.

**I just loveserrano peppers.** They're smaller than jalapeno peppers, but
quite a bit hotter. In fact, the hottest serrano pepper is about 3 times
hotter than the hottest jalapeno pepper. They measure in at **10,000 to
23,000Scoville Heat Units** on the Scoville Scale. For me, that's a nice level
of heat for an every day hot sauce.

You don't have to use serranos, though. This recipe works with any type of
chili pepper.

This is a very simple hot sauce recipe, though we're fermenting the peppers
first, which may sound complicated, but not at all.

## What is Fermentation? And Why is it Good For Hot Sauce?

**Fermentation is the decomposition of foods by micro-organisms (Lactic Acid
Bacteria) or enzymes.** We create an anaerobic (no oxygen) environment for the
peppers so that good, beneficial bacteria can survive, and bad bacteria cannot
survive. The good bacteria is natural Lactic acid bacteria, which consumes
carbohydrates in the peppers and converts them to acid. After fermenting, the
carbohydrates have been predigested, leaving them with more vitamins and
flavor than fresh peppers.

Bad bacteria, such as rotting molds, cannot survive in this oxygen-free
environment. We create such an environment with salt and brine, which protect
the peppers while the good bacteria do their work. The salt is not actually
the preservative. **It is the acid produced by the fermentation process that
does the preserving.**

There are many benefits to fermented foods, including foods that are more
digestible and have more developed flavor. When fermenting peppers, the
flavors mellow, and peppers change color a bit, and develop a pleasant smell.

Fermentation is one our oldest methods of food preservation. People have
preserved foods this way for generations, from wine to cheese to many, many
vegetables, including peppers.

**Let's talk about how to make a simple fermented hot sauce, shall we?** Here
is my recipe for fermented hot sauce.

## Ingredients Needed to Make Fermented Hot Sauce

  * 1 pound chili peppers (stems removed - I'm using red serrano peppers)
  * 1 quart unchlorinated water
  * 3 tablespoons salt 
  * ½-1 cup white wine vinegar to your preference (use a good quality vinegar for better quality hot sauce)

## How to Make Fermented Hot Sauce - the Recipe Method

**First, ferment the chili peppers.** Roughly chop the peppers, then pack them
into a ball jar, leaving at least 1 inch of head space. The peppers may rise a
bit when fermenting. Mason jars are good to use as fermentation vessels as
well.

**Make the Brine.** Next, mix 1 quart unchlorinated water with 3 tablespoons
sea salt. Pour just enough brine over the peppers to cover them, pressing them
down a bit as you go. It is important to keep the peppers covered with the
salt water brine to avoid spoilage. Check this daily. **HELPFUL TIP:** A good
method to keep the peppers submerged is to fill a baggie with some water, but
not all the way. Stuff the baggie into the top of the jar, forcing the peppers
down below the brine.

Screw on the lid and set the jar away from direct sunlight to ferment for at
least 1 week. Ideal temperatures are between 55-75 degrees F. The most active
fermentation period is between 1-2 weeks, so be sure to monitor it during this
time. "Burp" the jars often by unscrewing the lid a bit to let out some of the
accumulating gases. Or, use an airlock or membrane for easier fermenting. See
our page, **"How to Ferment Peppers"**, for more detailed instruction.

After 1-2 weeks, the fermenting activity will diminish and the brine will turn
cloudy and taste acidic, with a slightly sour flavor.

**Drain the peppers** , but reserve the brine.

**Add the fermented peppers** to a food processor or blender, along with 1/2
cup of the brine and 1/2 cup vinegar. You can add more or less of each as
desired to your preference. More brine will have more salty flavor, more
vinegar will be more acidic.

**Blend** until smooth.

**Add the fermented hot sauce to a pot** and bring to a quick boil. Reduce
heat and simmer for 15 minutes. This will stop the fermentation process.
**NOTE:** You don't have to cook the sauce if you don't want to. It can be
used as-is, though you will likely see some continued fermenting activity. If
you decide to not cook it, store it in the refrigerator in sealed containers.
You may need to burp them to release gas buildup every now and then, though
refrigeration will slow the activity.

**Strain the mixture** to remove the solids if desired, or use as-is for a
thicker hot sauce. Pour into hot sauce bottles and enjoy.

**That's it, my friends!** Easy, right? Who knew making a fermented hot sauce
could be so simple? It's really quite a bit like famous Tabasco Hot Sauce,
though made with red serrano peppers instead of tabasco peppers.

## Recipe Tips & Notes

  * **Fermentation Time.** Feel free to ferment longer if you'd like. Continuing to ferment the peppers will develop even more flavor. I have fermented peppers for 6 months in the past. Some people ferment for years. 1 week, however, is enough to get a good ferment.
  * **Kahm Yeast.** Sometimes you may notice a white film forming on the top of your ferment. It is sour and can form when all of the sugar in your ferment is consumed. It is not a mold, nor is it harmful. It can affect the flavor of your finished hot sauce, so it is best to be scraped away from your ferment.
  * **Thicker or Thinner Hot Sauce.** If you're looking for a thicker hot sauce, only use a combined half cup of brine and vinegar, and do not strain the hot sauce. For a thinner hot sauce, add more water and/or vinegar a bit at a time until you achieve the consistency you want. Straining the hot sauce will thin it out considerably.
  * **Other Ingredients.** This is a very simple Louisiana Style Hot Sauce recipe, using only peppers, vinegar and salt. You can easily include other ingredients to build flavor, such as garlic, onion, herbs and other seasonings.
  * **Other Peppers.** This method works with any type of chili peppers. Try it with a blend of hot peppers and/or mild peppers.

## Frequently Asked Hot Sauce Questions

Here are answers to some of the most common questions I get on other hot
sauces.

## How long will this sauce keep?

Fermented hot sauce will keep for many months in the refrigerator, or even
longer. It's all about the acidity. To be technical, target level ph for shelf
stable foods is below 4.6 ph, but should probably be lower for home cooks,
around 3.5 or so, to account for errors. If you're concerned, add more vinegar
to lower the ph. I measured the pH of my finished fermented hot sauce at 3.7,
but check with a good pH meter.

The best ph meters that I recommend are from Thermoworks. Get yourself a ph
meter from Thermoworks today. I am a happy affiliate.

Fermented hot sauces that are not cooked at the end with vinegar and/or citrus
should be refrigerated. Cooking them stops the fermentation activity and makes
them more shelf stable, though they are no longer probiotic.

## Where'd you get that sauce bottle?

I find them locally sometimes, but I also order through Amazon. Here is a link
to some bottles I like (affiliate link, my friends!): Swing Top Glass Bottles,
8.5 Ounce - Set of 4. If you like the smaller bottles that most hot sauce
makers use, here's another link: Hot Sauce Bottles, 5 Oz - 24 Pack.

## Can I process this hot sauce for longer storage?

Absolutely. Just be sure to use proper canning/jarring safety procedures.
Processing the hot sauce in a water bath stops the bacterial activity, making
the hot sauce shelf-stable. However, it will no longer be probiotic. The
National Center for Home Food Preservation provides home canning instructions
and many recipes that have been tested for food safety. NCHFP.uga.edu.

## Useful Equipment

Aside from jars and your ingredients, I like to use Masontops lids, which
include pickling weights and a membrane allowing gases to escape without the
need for burping. You can use them with any wide mouth mason jar. Here is a
link to where you can buy them on Amazon. It's an affiliate link, my friends.
FYI!

**Buy Masontop Lids for Fermenting Chili Peppers (and More)**

I also highly recommend this outstanding book by fermenting experts, Kirsten
K. Shockey and Christopher Shockey - "Fiery Ferments: 70 Stimulating Recipes
for Hot Sauces, Spicy Chutneys, Kimchis with Kick and Other Blazing Fermented
Condiments". I learned a lot from this book as well as through my own
experimentation. Grab a copy today.

Good luck, and happy fermenting! Let me know what you make with your pepper
mash.

## Try Some of My Other Fermented Hot Sauce Recipes

Here are some of my own recipes that use fermented chili peppers.

  * Homemade Sriracha Hot Sauce
  * Fermented Aji-Garlic Hot Sauce
  * Homemade Louisiana Hot Sauce
  * Homemade Tabasco Sauce
  * Spicy Serrano Hot Sauce

Check out more Hot Sauce Recipes or learn more about How to Make Hot Sauce.

**Got any questions? Ask away!** I'm happy to help. If you enjoy this recipe,
I hope you'll leave a comment with some STARS. Also, please share it on social
media. Don't forget to tag us at #ChiliPepperMadness. I'll be sure to share!
Thanks! -- Mike H.

Print

## Fermented Hot Sauce Recipe

I grew loads of peppers in my garden this year just so I could make this
fermented hot sauce recipe. It is wonderfully spicy and big on flavor. Drizzle
it over anything. Works for any type of peppers.

Course: hot sauce, Main Course

Cuisine: American

Keyword: fermented, hot sauce, preserving, recipe, serrano, spicy

Prep Time: 10 minutes

Cook Time: 15 minutes

Fermentation: 7 days

Calories: 3kcal

Author: Mike Hultquist

Servings: 60 teaspoons

**Tap or hover to scale**

4.94 from 32 votes

Leave a Review

### Ingredients

  * 1 pound red serrano peppers or use any chili peppers, stems removed
  * 1 quart unchlorinated water
  * 3 tablespoons salt
  * ½-1 cup white wine vinegar to your preference use a good quality vinegar for better quality hot sauce

### Instructions

  * First, ferment the serrano peppers. Roughly chop the peppers, then pack them into a ball jar, leaving at least 1 inch of head space. The peppers may rise a bit when fermenting.

  * Next, mix 1 quart unchlorinated water with 3 tablespoons sea salt. Pour just enough brine over the peppers to cover them, pressing them down a bit as you go. It is important to keep the peppers covered with brine to avoid spoilage. Check this daily.

  * Screw on the lid and set the jar away from direct sunlight to ferment for at least 1 week. Ideal temperatures are between 55-75 degrees F. The most active fermentation period is between 1-2 weeks, so be sure to monitor it during this time. "Burp" the jars often by unscrewing the lid a bit to let out some of the accumulating gases. Or, use an airlock or membrane for easier fermenting. See our page, "How to Ferment Peppers", for more detailed instruction.

  * After 1-2 weeks, the fermenting activity will diminish and the brine will turn cloudy and taste acidic.

  * Drain the peppers, but reserve the brine.

  * Add the fermented peppers to a food processor or blender, along with 1/2 cup of the brine and 1/2 cup vinegar. You can add more or less of each as desired to your preference. More brine will have more salty flavor, more vinegar will be more acidic.

  * Process until smooth.

  * Add the fermented hot sauce to a pot and bring to a quick boil. Reduce heat and simmer for 15 minutes. This will stop the fermentation process.

  * Strain the mixture to remove the solids if desired, or use as-is for a thicker hot sauce. Pour into hot sauce bottles and enjoy.

  * You can add more vinegar or water to thin out the hot sauce.

### Notes

pH for this sauce measured at 3.7. 3.5 or below is preferred for home
preserving if you plan on processing the hot sauce in a water bath. It will
still last many months in the refrigerator.

### Nutrition Information

Calories: 3kcal   Carbohydrates: 1g   Protein: 1g   Fat: 1g   Saturated Fat:
1g   Sodium: 351mg   Potassium: 24mg   Fiber: 1g   Sugar: 1g   Vitamin A: 71IU
Vitamin C: 3mg   Calcium: 2mg   Iron: 1mg

Did You Enjoy This Recipe?I love hearing how you like it and how you made it
your own. Leave a comment below and tag @ChiliPepperMadness on social media.

  *   *   *   *   * 

Categories: Hot Sauces Tags: Chili Pepper Madness, chili pepper recipe, hot
sauce recipe, serrano pepper

## Reader Interactions

### Comments

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name *

Email *

Recipe Rating Recipe Rating  
  
  
  
  

  1. DAN BAKER says

August 01, 2022 at 7:17 pm

HAVE YOU EVER TRIED FERMINTING WITH FRUIT JUICE IN AN AIR LOCK TO MAKE A WINE
TYPE SAUSE? THE ALCOHOL SHOULD ACT AS A PRESERVATIVE.

Reply

    * Mike Hultquist says

August 02, 2022 at 6:11 am

I have not, Dan. I focus primarily on peppers.

Reply

  2. Shannon says

August 01, 2022 at 8:21 am

I am going to try fermenting peppers for the first time. I like tomatoes and
tomatillos in my finished sauce. Should I add them to the peppers and ferment
them together or add them when I blend the sauce? I have never fermented
anything! Also, does cooking after blending kill off the probiotics?

Reply

    * Mike Hultquist says

August 01, 2022 at 11:20 am

Shannon, yes, you can ferment those, too. Yes, cooking the sauce will remove
any probiotic benefits, so you don't have to cook it if you don't want to.

Reply

  3. Gareth Coombs says

July 25, 2022 at 7:37 am

  
Hello Mike,  
What are your thoughts on dehydrating the fermented peppers and powdering to
use as a seasoning?

Reply

    * Mike Hultquist says

July 25, 2022 at 7:55 am

I've never dehydrated fermented peppers, Gareth, but you can surely do it.
Curious of the flavor.

Reply

      * Peter says

August 03, 2022 at 4:24 pm

I once strained a fermented sauce and dehydrated the solids in a food
dehydrator. They turned out much like red pepper flakes but -very- spicy.

Reply

        * Mike Hultquist says

August 03, 2022 at 4:35 pm

Nice! I love it! Great use.

Reply

  4. Mike says

July 02, 2022 at 1:48 pm

At step 4 can I leave the peppers to ferment for 3 months? I use fermentation
jars and keep the peppers submerged by a weight.

Reply

    * Mike Hultquist says

July 11, 2022 at 8:49 am

Mike, you certainly can. I often ferment for many months.

Reply

  5. Warren B says

July 02, 2022 at 12:55 pm

  
Thank you so much for this very thorough process. It was very easy to follow
and very tweak-able, which I really enjoyed. Great work!

Reply

    * Mike Hultquist says

July 11, 2022 at 8:54 am

Thanks, Warren! Glad you enjoyed it! Happy to be helpful.

Reply

  6. Devin says

June 30, 2022 at 12:16 pm

Quick question about the fermentation, I used this recipe and my jar of
jalapeños fermented. But the banana peppers and red chilies didn’t ? Do they
take longer?

Reply

    * Mike Hultquist says

June 30, 2022 at 12:38 pm

Devin, I assume you mean in separate jars. Some ferments can take longer, and
some can just be quiet ferments, where you don't see a lot of activity. You
can usually smell and taste the ferment to see if it's working. There will be
that funk factor.

Reply

  7. John Simmons says

June 20, 2022 at 7:19 am

  
Simple to do and it tastes great. I also used Serrano peppers.

Reply

    * Mike Hultquist says

June 20, 2022 at 7:25 am

Awesome! Thanks, John!

Reply

  8. Kei says

June 01, 2022 at 2:46 pm

Does this make about 1 cup of hot sauce??

Reply

    * Mike Hultquist says

June 01, 2022 at 3:13 pm

Kei, a bit more than a cup, though you can easily scale up. You'll also have
more if you don't strain.

Reply

  9. Phil Balliet says

May 24, 2022 at 1:16 pm

Hello Mike I have a question for you. I am fermenting 3 jars of peppers. One
jalapeño, and two habanero. I noticed the white Kahm yeast is gathering around
the onions and garlic, not floating up to the top. Is that an issue?  
For reference, I put 1/2 onion and 6 to 8 cloves of garlic in first… then the
peppers, followed by 1 sweet pepper which I use as a “lid” to keep the smaller
peppers and onions under the glass weight and completely submerged in the
brine.

Thank you for your help.

Reply

    * Mike Hultquist says

May 24, 2022 at 2:00 pm

Phil, kahm yeast usually forms on the surface but can work its way down and
settle to the bottom, so it may have spread a little. It's harmless, but can
be sour. Make sure it isn't mold, which is more fuzzy and textured. If it's
mold, you'll likely notice a bad smell.

Reply

  10. Allan says

May 19, 2022 at 12:34 am

Im interested to know how you calculate the mg of sodium per serve in a
finished fermented hot sauce.

Reply

    * Mike Hultquist says

May 19, 2022 at 5:52 am

I believe you really need to know the amounts of your starter ingredients.
Would love to hear from others on this.

Reply

      * Allan says

May 19, 2022 at 1:35 pm

Whilst there is sodium in the ingredients e.g the peppers, I assume the
majority comes from the concentration of salt in the brine. There would be
osmosis during fermentation and more sodium would end up in the peppers. Some
people soak their gherkins for e.g. in water for a while before eating. This
reduces the salt concentration through osmosis but may effect taste and
firmness in some products. Depending on how much of the brine you blend with
the puréed fermented ingredients will also impact the final sodium in the
sauce. Notwithstanding I’m looking for a close ball park calculation as I
assume to get accurate measurements would require appropriate lab analysis.

Reply

        * Mike Hultquist says

May 21, 2022 at 7:17 am

Allan, I don't really have an answer for you on the sodium calculations. As
you mentioned, much does depend on the brine, how much brine you use in your
sauce, absorption into the ingredients, etc. As a home sauce maker, I don't
really have a way to measure that. Sorry, wish I could help more.

Reply

  11. Lev says

March 16, 2022 at 2:58 pm

  
Don't throw out your leftover brine!!!

I've been making a Fresno Chili hot sauce based off of this recipe for years
now and it's always been fun finding a use for the leftover brine. Bloody
Marys and soups have been the main uses, but I've also used the brine to
deglaze pans and such.

Today however I discovered a use that I felt I had to share. I like to make
broth for drinking from chicken carcasses or beef bones whenever I collect
enough. Today I added about 15% brine to the broth and it's absolutely
amazing. The tangy salty fermenty flavor goes so well with the richness of the
broth! I hope someone else gives it a try and enjoys it as much as my family
does.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

March 16, 2022 at 3:31 pm

Perfection right there, Lev! I love it! Thanks so much for sharing your ideas.

Reply

  12. Lori Mayfield says

January 02, 2022 at 1:13 pm

  
Hi Michael,

I've used your recipes a few times with fresh peppers, and they are all great.
I've been fermenting in jars for a few weeks now and ready to do the fermented
pepper hot sauce. I have no idea how to convert how much pepper mash I need to
the amounts required in your recipes. Unfortunately, I processed mine in a
blender before I fermented, so the "peppers" are already mixed with water and
look like a chunky sauce instead of rough cut peppers. Should I convert this
by weight to what your recipes call for? Is a pound of fresh peppers the same
as a pound of fermented pepper mash? Thanks for your help!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

January 03, 2022 at 8:57 am

Thanks, Lori. Yes, best to go by weights in this case, though you do have some
flexibility. Let me know how it goes for you. Enjoy.

Reply

  13. tip loo says

December 26, 2021 at 7:10 pm

Hello  
How long should you ferment the chili peppers, before adding the brine
solution? thanks,

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

December 27, 2021 at 9:26 am

Tip, you can start with the brine solution, or just wait for the peppers to
develop the brine solution themselves. See my page on How to Ferment Peppers
for further information: https://www.chilipeppermadness.com/cooking-with-
chili-peppers/how-to-make-fermented-pepper-mash/

Reply

  14. Scott P. says

December 22, 2021 at 2:19 pm

I ferment in a 1/2 gallon jar. I cut a white onion in half and spread them out
over my peppers to the edge of the jar, then put a Pickle Pebble on top of the
onion petals. No floaters.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

December 22, 2021 at 2:31 pm

Perfect! Thanks for sharing your experience, Scott!

Reply

  15. H Scott says

November 23, 2021 at 11:51 am

  
Made this after fermenting habaneros for 3 years. Very nice spicy flavor

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 23, 2021 at 1:33 pm

Outstanding. That's one long ferment! Nice.

Reply

  16. Zion says

November 21, 2021 at 2:19 pm

  
Hey Mike! I've made fermented hot sauce before using your recipe and only gave
it a two-week ferment. I was very good, but this time I gave it two months,
and holy cats! What a difference! I was lucky enough to find red serranos at
an Asian supermarket, so the color is beautiful. I did get a bit of Kahm yeast
but I just spooned it off and whirled the peppers, brine, and vinegar in a
blender for about five minutes. Added a little more filtered water to get to a
thin enough consistency that I could use the dripper top on the 5oz woozy
bottles. Thanks for yet another terrific recipe/method!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 21, 2021 at 3:51 pm

Nice!! Glad to help, Zion. Enjoy the hot sauce!

Reply

  17. Andrew says

October 25, 2021 at 11:58 pm

  
Hello! In your picture of the completed ferment it has a cloudy white
brine/liquid at the top. Mine has a cloudy brown brine/liquid at the top.
Should I be concerned about the color difference?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 26, 2021 at 6:27 am

Andrew, no, a cloudy brine is pretty common.

Reply

  18. Graham Fraser says

October 17, 2021 at 12:08 pm

  
Justs finished making hot sauce for the first time using your recipe. After a
2 week ferment I processed the peppers, not sure what king they are but they
are plenty hot!!!! I wanted a slightly thicker sauce but do not want the
seeds, they are impossible to separate. Can I seed the peppers before I
ferment them and then just end up with only pulp?  
Otherwise quite a successful first try. Next season I'll try to identify the
peppers prior to buying to find something a little less atomic!  
Thanks for the recipe.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 17, 2021 at 12:24 pm

Graham, thanks. Yes, for future reference, you can definitely core out the
peppers before fermenting. You could also process and strain after. For
thicker sauce, strain out the brine, process the solids, then add in brine or
fresh water/liquid and process to your preferred consistency. Enjoy!

Reply

  19. Michael says

October 14, 2021 at 1:23 pm

  
Hi Mike - I had a bumper crope of aji and habanero peppers this year, and
attempting to make a fermented pepper sauce for the first time. I did buy the
Masontop “Pickle Pipes” that you use. I check them daily and seems that the
mash is rising to the top and into the open space in the jar. There is nothing
but liquid in about halfway up the mason jar below the mash. The mash is
almost solid on top. I redistribute in an effort to get water covering the
mash. By the way, I am using the brining technique from your article.

Any ideas here? There is certainly an odor coming from the jar when I open it,
but not sure if it is a rotten smell or simply the smell of peppers starting
to ferment.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 14, 2021 at 1:37 pm

Hey, Michael. I use the little glass weights that come with the Masontops, but
you can use a plastic baggie filled with water stuffed into the top. That
works great. Keep an eye on the odor. If it smells rotten/bad, not a good
sign.

Reply

  20. Michelle says

October 13, 2021 at 6:05 am

  
I am wondering if I can use xanthan gum when I blend the hot sauce even if I
am not cooking it after fermentation?

I really appreciate your website. I made a whole bunch of hot sauces last year
and dehydrated the solids to make spices. My whole family has been enjoying
them all year long!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 13, 2021 at 6:18 am

Hi, Michelle. You don't need to heat it to thicken a sauce. It will begin to
thicken as soon as it starts to mix with the liquid. It is best to use a
blender, as it will begin to thicken immediately, and could clump up if mixing
manually. Let me know how it goes for you. Glad to be helpful!

Reply

  21. Brad Hamilton says

October 07, 2021 at 4:34 pm

  
I'm about to try my luck with this recipe. My little twist is wanting to smoke
the peppers first. Just wondering if this will have any ill e  
ffects with fermentation process?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 08, 2021 at 6:10 am

Nice! They can be fermented, though you MIGHT need to use a fermentation
starter, or mix with fresh peppers to get the ferment going. Let me know how
it turns out for you. Enjoy!

Reply

  22. Char Molrine says

October 05, 2021 at 10:32 am

  
I love fermenting chile peppers and making my own hot sauce with your recipe.
I have branched out and added a handful of blueberries to my buena mulata
pepper mix and cranberries to my serrano pepper mix. I was wondering if there
is a way to reduce the amount of settlement that occurs after the sauce has
been cooked, strained and bottled. Some peppers seem to settle more than
others. I just tell folks to shake before use, but I I thought you might have
a suggestion.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 05, 2021 at 11:17 am

Thanks, Char. About the shake, yes, that's what I tell people as well, just
give the bottle a shake. You can try incorporating thickeners into your
sauces, like arrowroot or Xanthan Gum, which is used commercially.

Reply

  23. Dani lewis says

October 03, 2021 at 8:19 am

I would like to store outside of the fridge. How would I do that?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 03, 2021 at 12:59 pm

Dani, a lot of people store their hot sauces outside of the fridge. Just make
sure your acidity is high enough. Shoot for 3.5 or lower pH for home keeping.
Keep in a cool, dark place, like the pantry. Keep an eye on it, though, for
any signs of rot or bad smells. Add more acid if needed, like vinegar or
citrus.

Reply

  24. Jerry says

October 01, 2021 at 8:04 am

  
.Hi Mike,  
What a terrific resource for hot sauce you have created here. Wonderful site -
thank you. I added too much vinegar and brine when I blended and my sauce is
very thin. Can I just simmer longer to reduce the liquid volume? Will this
have a negative effect on flavor or heat level?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 01, 2021 at 2:16 pm

Jerry, yes, you can simmer to reduce. It should not affect the heat level. I
hope you enjoy it!

Reply

  25. Linda says

September 26, 2021 at 10:23 am

I just started a batch but when I poured in the salt water (1 quart water/ 3
tbsp salt), only about half of it fits in the jar already filled with peppers.
Is there a reason why we make so much liquid when only about half will be
used? Also, I used fine sea salt but just wondering if the amount of salt
needed is different when using fine vs coarse. Thank you!!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 26, 2021 at 11:17 am

Linda, you can save the extra brine if desired or use it for another batch.
Space can vary, so extra is better just in case it is needed. Use 3
tablespoons fine salt.

Reply

  26. John says

September 17, 2021 at 11:45 am

  
Thanks for the thoughtful instructions, Mike. Can I freeze some of the
finished product? I'm having a bumper year for peppers, myself.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 17, 2021 at 1:52 pm

John, absolutely, you can freeze hot sauce. Freezing or fermenting it will
remove the probiotic benefits, but not the fermented flavor, which is what
many go for anyway.

Reply

  27. Taylor Hathaway says

September 10, 2021 at 10:53 am

Can I add fresh herbs like cilantro to the blend (after fermentation), and/or
lime juice? If so, will it effect its shelf life?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 10, 2021 at 1:19 pm

Taylor, absolutely. You can add all sorts of ingredients to add flavor and
character. Citrus will increase shelf life (higher acidity).

Reply

  28. Linda Gregor says

September 04, 2021 at 10:48 am

Hello, just wonder what size mason jar was used for this recipe. Thanks!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 04, 2021 at 11:17 am

Linda, it is 1 quart.

Reply

  29. Andrea Rodriguez says

August 25, 2021 at 11:33 am

Hi Michael, I have a few of questions:  
Can you refrigerate some of the peppers until more become red on the plant (or
until I have time during a less busy weekend)?

Also, are the peppers bad once they start to soften?

And last, have you combined red and green peppers in a hot sauce?

I'm looking forward to trying this fermenting method and your other one with
green serranos and tequila!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

August 25, 2021 at 11:47 am

Andrea, yes, you can refrigerate until you get a larger batch. They do start
to soften and turn black with rotting on the inside. You can still use them
when starting to soften, but freshest is best. Yes, you can combine any
peppers. Enjoy!!!

Reply

  30. Sam says

August 10, 2021 at 7:08 pm

Have you done this with Jalapeños? Mine are doing so well this year.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

August 10, 2021 at 9:24 pm

Absolutely, Sam. Works with any peppers. Let me know how it goes for you.
Enjoy.

Reply

  31. aaron schmitz says

June 15, 2021 at 7:25 am

They all say fermenting is soooo easy, yet every fermenting article I read is
different. Most cover jar with cheese cloth, this guy says cover with lid.
What is the difference?  
Also, do I ferment all the fruits and veggies that are going into the sauce or
just the peppers? So confusing.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 15, 2021 at 11:41 am

Aaron, it is rather easy when you learn it, especially when you're just
fermenting peppers. As with anything, however, the more you learn, the more
you discover. First, see my post on How to Ferment Peppers
(https://www.chilipeppermadness.com/cooking-with-chili-peppers/how-to-make-
fermented-pepper-mash/). It has a lot of info. You might also buy one of many
books available to learn even more. You can use a cheese cloth, but I prefer
not to as I feel you can still get an infection. I prefer a lid to keep it as
clean as possible. A membrane (like the rubber lip I use) lets built up air
out, but not in, so I don't have to burp the jars (which exposes the brine to
the air temporarily). You CAN ferment the fruits and veggies with the peppers,
but you don't have to. Just add them in later to the sauce. Each way will
yield different flavors. Fruits have a lot more sugar, so will ferment more
quickly and will need gas release more often (like when I make kombucha).

In short, it IS easy to ferment peppers, but when you introduce other
variables, yes, more questions arise. Welcome to the beginning of your
journey. Enjoy!!

Reply

  32. Tina says

May 14, 2021 at 7:23 am

just wondering if any of these recipes could be made with frozen whole
peppers. Got a bunch that I need to do something with

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

May 14, 2021 at 11:03 am

Tina, yes, you can make many hot sauces from frozen. If you want to ferment,
you MAY need a fermentation starter, but often they will ferment. Let me know
how it goes for you.

Reply

  33. Saleem says

March 07, 2021 at 1:45 am

  
Awesome guide, I used normal bell peppers I have started 2 weeks ago is it too
late to add fruits to the fermentation .

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

March 07, 2021 at 6:45 am

Saleem, you can add more and keep fermenting, or remove the peppers and use
the brine to keep going with the fruit.

Reply

  34. Phillip says

February 23, 2021 at 6:25 am

  
Hi Mike,  
Making yet another batch of fermented chilli sauce which is a permanent staple
in my fridge. Have you any suggestions for the flavoursome leftover brine?  
Phil

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

February 23, 2021 at 6:41 am

Phillip, you can use it to start another batch of peppers fermenting, or you
can use it to enhance dishes like soups and stews or vinaigrettes. Enjoy!

Reply

  35. CHEFFZILLA says

February 07, 2021 at 7:55 am

I’m working on a recipe plan that includes roasted garlic. I make garlic-
infused EVOO, which includes simmering garlic cloves in the oil for a half
hour, then resting it for another half hour before straining the garlic
solids. Would I be better off adding the garlic solids to the ferment (it
would have a bit of EVOO residue), or after ferment, in the blending stage?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

February 08, 2021 at 6:30 am

You can really do it either way, Jeff. It's up to you for flavor preferences.
Everything mellows in the ferment and develops a bit of funk factor, though
roasted garlic is already pretty mellowed and richly flavored. No right or
wrong here.

Reply

  36. Joe Bogdanovich says

December 18, 2020 at 5:22 pm

  
Okay, so I have a question for the gurus out there. I am boiling/simmering my
sauce right now. I have a LOT of brine left over. What can I do with that?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

December 19, 2020 at 8:24 am

Joe, you can use some to start another ferment batch going. You can also use
some to add some flavor to soup bases, stews, etc. Or just toss it.

Reply

  37. Clint says

December 15, 2020 at 9:38 am

Great Recipe! I've done 4 batches of this sauce as the peppers ripen. Tip: I
do about 3 cups of cut peppers with 2 cups brine in a french press. The
plunger keeps your peppers below the brine level...perfect sauce every time!
After 1 week fermentation, I cook with one cup vinegar and 2 cups
brine...makes a fairly thick sauce...enough to fill five 5oz bottles.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

December 15, 2020 at 3:49 pm

Perfect, Clint! Great tip. Thanks for sharing.

Reply

  38. Jack says

December 06, 2020 at 10:24 am

How much sauce does this recipe make?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

December 06, 2020 at 10:45 am

This made me a good 6-7 ounces, though results will vary from straining, and
you can adjust amounts with vinegar.

Reply

  39. Dave says

November 13, 2020 at 12:10 pm

Could you process this until it is very smooth in a Nutribullet Pro food
extractor after allowing it to cool to refrigerator temperature?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 14, 2020 at 1:54 pm

Dave, absolutely! Let me know how it turns out for you! Enjoy.

Reply

  40. pclark says

November 06, 2020 at 5:53 pm

  
Thanks for your amazing site & recipes! I did a brine ferment with 2 kgs of
blitzed reapers. Now fermenting them in my instant pot (turned off of course),
and in total I have about 5 liters of mash/brine. Is there a rule of thumb
about how much vinegar/lime to add per liters when using the brine method?
Thanks!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

November 07, 2020 at 7:26 am

You're welcome! No rule of thumb, but enough to get the pH down to about 3.5
or lower for home keeping/preserving (though you don't have to), or to your
own personal taste. You can skip vinegar/lime altogether, but it won't last as
long.

Reply

  41. Don says

October 05, 2020 at 10:57 am

Hi Mike,

I would like to add fermented tomatoes to this recipe. Do you see any problems
with doing that? Any suggestions? Thanks!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 05, 2020 at 12:03 pm

Don, no problem at all. Let me know how it turns out for you.

Reply

  42. Jason Spratt says

October 04, 2020 at 8:06 am

Can I use fruit in a fermented sauce? I was thinking about a superhot
pineapple sauce. But Im concerned that the fruit could be problematic.
Thoughts?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 05, 2020 at 7:28 am

Jason, absolutely. I do this all the time. Enjoy!

Reply

  43. Betty says

October 03, 2020 at 8:43 pm

  
I’m in the process of making this recipe! I have three jars of peppers about a
week into their ferment and I’m smelling something sulfuric. Is this normal?
Thank you!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

October 05, 2020 at 7:32 am

Betty, what other ingredients are you fermenting with the peppers? Some
ingredients can give off sulfur smells, which is normal for them. It should
dissipate.

Reply

  44. MARTIN PAPCUN says

September 29, 2020 at 3:33 am

First time fermenting. I have 3 jars with 3 different types of peppers.
Fermenting for 2 weeks now. In one jar the seeds all dropped to the bottom and
a a white habaneros has a white substance, almost a slime forming on the
bottom of the jar. It dissolves when I move the jar. Is this normal?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 29, 2020 at 5:46 am

Martin, it could be the salt from the brine settling to the bottom. More
likely it is yeast developing and settling, which is normal. If you notice a
bad, rotting smell or taste from the brine, that would indicate spoilage of
some sort.

Reply

  45. James says

September 25, 2020 at 12:59 pm

First time trying to ferment serronoes almost two weeks my serronoes have a
sour smell to them and the brine is thick is this normal

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 25, 2020 at 1:23 pm

James, a sour smell is normal. It normally doesn't thicken from my experience,
but if it smells and tastes OK, there shouldn't be a problem. If it's more
slimy, you may have too weak of a brine. If it smells rotten or very bad,
that's not a good sign.

Reply

  46. Angelina M Taylor says

September 23, 2020 at 10:39 am

Ok so my peppers have been fermenting for about 3 weeks. Today when I went to
blend them they smell like a bottle of alcohol. Is this normal? Are they good
still?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 23, 2020 at 12:00 pm

Angelina, there is often a slightly sour smell to the ferment, but if it has
converted to alcohol, you most likely didn't have enough salt in the brine.
You can cook the batch to cook out the alcohol, or leave it fermenting to
continue to convert to vinegar.

Reply

  47. Jeanette Lawton says

September 13, 2020 at 12:21 pm

My son and I are doing this process, and we would like to know how to keep the
peppers submerged, as they like to float in the brine, at least initially.
Advice? Thanks

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 14, 2020 at 7:35 am

Jeanette, I use a small glass weight, but you can use a cabbage leaf or a
baggie with some water in it stuffed into the top.

Reply

  48. Jamie says

September 07, 2020 at 4:10 pm

  
Great guide! Made a small batch with some tiny sweet chilies (no idea what
they were) and habaneros. Fermented for 2 weeks, then blended and left thick.
Incredible flavour, like a Huy Fong Sriracha with that fruity habanero
element. It was gone within a week of processing lol

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 07, 2020 at 9:58 pm

Great! Glad to be helpful, Jamie. I appreciate it.

Reply

  49. Tina~ says

September 05, 2020 at 11:06 am

Is there an alternative to white vinegar? Could you use Apple Cider Vinegar
for the hot sauce instead?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 05, 2020 at 11:42 am

Tina, yes, you can use any type of edible vinegar for making hot sauce.

Reply

  50. Greg says

September 01, 2020 at 7:26 pm

One last question - do you recommend fermenting the peppers relatively whole,
as in the above recipe, or making them into a mash and fermenting that way as
you explain on another part of your site? What are the main advantages or
disadvantages to these different methods, or does it matter much?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 02, 2020 at 5:47 am

Greg, it will work either way. Biggest advantage of chopping them up is that
you can fit more in the jar. However, they are easier to keep submerged
beneath the brine when whole. Good to do a rough chop with larger chunks.

Reply

  51. Greg says

September 01, 2020 at 7:18 pm

I have been making fresh hot sauces for a few years, but never a fermented
sauce. I love your site and am going to give your recipe a try. My major
question is whether I should cook the sauce before bottling or not. What does
this do to the flavor exactly? If uncooked, can I store the sauce in 5 oz
woozy jars? With my other sauces I bottle and then use a heat-activated shrink
wrap to seal them. They typically last for months unrefrigerated, and I give
them as gifts. I don't want to kill the flavor after going through all the
trouble of fermenting, but I don't want to have to burp lots of hot sauce
bottles all the time if they're going to continue to ferment... please advise!
I am mainly concerned about the effect of cooking on the flavor, not
necessarily the "good bacteria."

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 02, 2020 at 5:49 am

Greg, you don't have to cook it if you don't want to. Cooking will change the
flavor a bit, but not a ton. Cooking stops the fermenting process. You can
still bottle it uncooked, but there may still be fermenting activity, which
can cause the bottles to burst. If flavor is your main concern, I suggest
making a small batch, give it a taste, then cook a portion of it. Compare them
and see how you feel.

Reply

  52. Jason Goss says

August 31, 2020 at 4:40 pm

Trying to make my very first batch of homemade hot sauce this year with the
ghost and habanero peppers I grew in my little garden. My biggest concern and
main question I have is about the bottling process. I want to give some to
family and friends as gifts. I ordered 5 oz. woozy bottles from amazon with
dripper inserts and the usual plastic lids. Any info on how to bottle it
safely and with a good shelf life would be appreciated. Like I said, it's my
first attempt and I am a total novice to bottling or canning even though I
have been a restaurant cook for 16 years. So go easy on me but all the advice
and knowledge is much appreciated.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

September 01, 2020 at 5:43 am

Jason, check out my page on canning/jarring:
https://www.chilipeppermadness.com/preserving-chili-peppers/canning-or-
jarring-chili-peppers/. I hope this helps!

Reply

  53. Carl says

August 31, 2020 at 2:41 pm

I do use the 5 oz bottles for my hot sauce, but I wash the bottles in the dish
washer along with the caps.  
I leave them in the dishwasher until I am ready to fill (I put the caps into a
pot of boiled water) then fill with cooked hot sauce then cap.  
These I store in the fridge until use and after using.  
You could use 4 oz jelly jars for the hot sauce, then you could hot water
process them to be able to store them with out refrigeration.  
To process properly the lid needs to be able to let air out, then when
cooling, seals when a vacuum is created.  
You could also use 1/2 pint jars (8oz).  
It all depends how generous you feel!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

August 31, 2020 at 3:01 pm

Thanks, Carl!

Reply

  54. PaulID says

August 29, 2020 at 2:09 pm

  
Question if I want to add a fruit like peach to my sauce would I do that at
first so that torments with the peppers or at the end when I am ready to
bottle?

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

August 30, 2020 at 7:08 am

Paul, you can ferment fruit. Peaches have a higher sugar content so you'll
probably see a lot of activity. Make sure you frequently burp the jars if
needed.

Reply

  55. Angelina says

August 26, 2020 at 11:51 am

I see use a baggie

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

August 26, 2020 at 12:02 pm

Yep, works great! The glass weights work as well.

Reply

  56. Angelina says

August 26, 2020 at 11:48 am

Is there a truck I can use to keep the peppers under the brine? When I make
fermented sauerkraut I use a glass lid.  
Thx for sharing so much info.  
Angelina

Reply

  57. Angelina says

August 26, 2020 at 9:17 am

When would you add the garlic before fermenting or after?  
Thanks looking forward to trying this. My family LOVES HOT so I have habenero
and ghost peppers to try this with. Doing them separately. Hope it's hot
enough for them .

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

August 26, 2020 at 11:26 am

Angelina, I like to add it after, as I enjoy the flavor of the stronger
garlic. You can do either way, though. Let me know how it turns out! Nice and
HOT, I hope!

Reply

  58. Henry Giles says

August 25, 2020 at 4:17 am

  
Used this recipe with scotch bonnets, garlic, peppers and red onion and it
worked beautifully. Added a little bit of corn flour to thicken as it was very
runny. I also froze the filtered pulp and add into sauces when cooking

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

August 25, 2020 at 7:05 am

Thanks, Henry! Glad you enjoyed it, and are able to use the pulp as well!
Nothing goes to waste.

Reply

  59. Lauren says

August 15, 2020 at 11:14 am

  
Great website! I’m learning so much. Can fermented hot sauce brine be re-used?
Or maybe added in a portion to jumpstart a new ferment? In the past when I
have made kimchi I keep any leftover brine in the event my next batch doesn’t
have enough to cover the cabbage right away. It seems like it also helps start
the fermentation a little bit faster.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

August 15, 2020 at 11:49 am

Thanks, Lauren. Yes, you can use the brine again to kickstart a new ferment.

Reply

  60. Cindee says

August 12, 2020 at 2:09 pm

  
Yum! Lacking enough red serranos in the garden, I included red jalapenos,
yellow cayennes and a couple other random red chilis. Fermented as instructed.
After the food processor, I strained half so we could compare. Loved the thick
version the best. Really delicious. Chose not cook to retain beneficial
bacteria. I highly recommend this. Mike - you are my hero!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

August 12, 2020 at 2:24 pm

Sounds PERFECT, Cindee! I love it! Glad you are enjoying it.

Reply

  61. Kevin Cacioppo says

August 02, 2020 at 2:52 pm

  
Hello Mike - great stuff here - thank you!

I want to bottle my hot-sauce in 5 oz. bottles however I would like to bottle
in bottles that can undergo a hot bath. How would you recommend I move forward
- with the bottle supplier info you provided, it did not appear their 5 oz
bottles could undergo a hot bath.

Any great ideas to help here?

Thanks!

Kevin

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

August 02, 2020 at 3:15 pm

Kevin, you may need to find bottles with different caps, or bottle them in
other jars.

Reply

  62. Aidan says

July 24, 2020 at 5:36 pm

  
Hi Mike, love your recipe, I can’t really express how excited I am to try
this. A few quick question. If you add garlic to the ferment beforehand,
should it be minced, rough chopped, or whole? Are carrots and or onions
possible to add? And if you add citrus to the ferment before hand, would that
affect anything negatively? Thanks, and I love what you do!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

July 25, 2020 at 9:28 am

Aidan, you can add chopped garlic, carrots and onions, no problem. I would add
in the citrus later on. Let me know how it goes for you. Enjoy!

Reply

  63. Martin McLeod says

July 23, 2020 at 6:28 pm

  
Hi Mike,  
I am working on my 1st hot sauce. I did a 2 week ferment with golden cayenne
and Manzana chilies. I think I did everything right and now I am cooking it
off and it has a slight sour scent. Is it possible to add some sugar or a
fruit preserve to help with the scent a little?  
Or do I have to scrap it and start again? That would suck because it was my
best crop to date. Help!!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

July 24, 2020 at 5:45 am

Martin, yes, you can add other ingredients to adjust for flavor. No problem.
This is very common. Let me know how it turns out for you.

Reply

  64. Jim Snow says

July 05, 2020 at 9:44 am

  
Mike, I'm trying my first batch of fermentation right now. I'm following all
the steps, brine solution, recipe etc. One week in, and no bubbles. Brine has
produced a cloudy appearance, no mold, with super hots, onion and garlic.
Still no bubbles though. Smells fine, good actually. Do I need to just wait it
out, or add anything? Thanks for the advice

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

July 06, 2020 at 6:03 am

Jim, it is possible that you have a quiet ferment. It doesn't always bubble a
lot. With the cloudiness, it is probably working, but trust your other senses.
If it smells good, tastes a bit pickly, it's working, just quiet. You can
always test the pH as well.

Reply

  65. brent says

May 07, 2020 at 10:07 pm

  
I had enough for an 8 oz bottle: think franks' buffalo size.

If I had this to do all over again.  
More charred onion instead of a little.  
More charred garlic instead of little.  
More habaneros instead of less.  
A higher citrus amt that a trace.

You say something like "it's done fermenting when you cook it." Not only done
fermenting, it's done.  
The cooking changes the profile completely---it's a different sauce: things
are blended now, things mellowed instead intensified. Much better taste than
the fermented stuff but the edge came off.

I have no complaint, I learned a valuable lesson: intensify the mash and go
farther that what you think you will handle. For me the taste was excellent
and edge came off some. I can't wait to do this again.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

May 08, 2020 at 2:52 pm

Thanks, Brent. I appreciate the comments.

Reply

  66. Jonah says

March 31, 2020 at 2:26 pm

Question: When adding other ingredients like garlic, herbs, or veggies, would
I add that before fermenting or to the actual sauce afterwards? Thank you!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

April 01, 2020 at 7:30 am

Johan, you can ferment other veggies and herbs as well if you'd like, though
it isn't required. Try it both ways and see if you have a flavor preference.

Reply

    * Larry Lawrence says

June 11, 2020 at 9:21 am

I'm fixing to start fermenting my first batch of red tabasco peppers ever but
I'm thinking about adding some roasted garlic to the fermenting process just
to add a little flavoring. Do you feel this is a good idea or will I be
messing up the fermenting process?

Reply

      * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

June 11, 2020 at 11:54 am

Larry, I've never fermented roasted garlic, though I think you'd be able to.
You can ferment unroasted garlic, and the flavor actually turns out quite a
bit like roasted garlic. Something you may want to consider. Or you can just
add in roasted garlic later when making the sauce. Let me know how it turns
out for you.

Reply

  67. brent says

March 14, 2020 at 5:50 pm

Had a weeks vacation. Fermented about a dozen habaneros, proportionately,
according to your recipe here: “How to Ferment Peppers”  
Used coffee filters-topped mason because I wasn't home to burp. Stashed it in
my weber charcoal grill. Smoke smell permeated these guys--nice!

So I have a nice cloudy mix. Not sour, no mold, I lucked out. This is my first
time.  
If I follow your recipe on this page: food process then cook: peppers, some
brine, vinegar. Then strain....

I have a dozen habs.....I don't think this is the right recipe for me.

My question is: What would you do with a dozen fermented habs? I'd like a
little tomato taste (hint of paste?), a small citrus accent, and  
garlicky. I trust your judgment---point me in the right direction.

P.S.--thanks for your hard work on this site. I've been enjoying it for over a
year and have even used an affiliate to link to purchase a piece of kitchen
equipment. Keep up the valuable work.

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

March 15, 2020 at 5:48 pm

Great, Brent. Glad it turned out. Yes, you can process it with some tomato
(either fresh or paste), garlic and citrus are always welcomed. I love
habaneros with more Caribbean fruits, such a great combo. Let me know what you
wind up making! Exciting!

Reply

      * brent says

March 16, 2020 at 4:44 pm

  
Rating this 5 stars before I make it----my ferment is successful thanks to
you. I am going to give it another week now to ferment more.

I like your aji ferment recipe. The lime part at especially. But I do have
pineapple, and I have 7 more days to decide! I agree, fruit pairs well with
habs. Even considering orange and abandoning the tomato sauce. Graci, good
sir.

Reply

        * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

March 17, 2020 at 7:04 am

Thanks, Brent! Glad the mash turned out! Great hot sauce awaits you!

Reply

  68. Elea says

February 26, 2020 at 12:02 am

  
It worked as described. It is a good starter recipe and I look forward to
trying a few different variations. I think maybe I didn't skim the white stuff
off the top and that may have impacted the flavor so next time I'm going to
pay more attention to that. Overall pretty cool to be able to make my own
fermented hot sauce. Thanks for the recipe!

Reply

    * Michael Hultquist - Chili Pepper Madness says

February 26, 2020 at 7:16 am

Thanks, Elea! Good luck making more and more hot sauce! Enjoy.

Reply

## Primary Sidebar

**ALL. SPICY. RECIPES.** Hi, I’m Mike and I LOVE Spicy Food! Say goodbye to
bland and boring food with my easy-to-follow recipes. Let’s get cooking!

More about me →

Mexican

Cajun

Sauces

Seasonings

### 5 ESSENTIALS FOR SPICY COOKING

Subscribe and receive my FREE email series with tips for spicy cooking and new
Recipes

**AMAZON / BARNES & NOBLE / ** **INDIEBOUND  ** **/  BOOKS A MILLION**

**AMAZON / BARNES & NOBLE / INDIEBOUND**

### Most Popular Recipes

  * Bang Bang Chicken

  * Creamy Fish Taco Sauce

  * Mexican Birria Recipe

  * Homemade Blackening Seasoning

  * Michelada Recipe - Spicy Mexican Beer and Tomato Juice Cocktail

  * Pollo Guisado Recipe (Chicken Stew)

## Footer

## NEVER MISS A RECIPE

Receive my "5 Essentials for Spicy Cooking" email series & new recipes

Search

  *   *   *   *   * 

↑ back to top

About | Contact | Travel-Food | Stories | Privacy | Disclaimer | © 2022 Chili
Pepper Madness

EXCLUSIVE MEMBER OF MEDIAVINE FOOD

